To assess the genetic variation of different SARS-
CoV-2 strains, the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource
of China National Center for Bioinformation aligned
77,801 genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 detected glob-
ally and identified a total of 15,018 mutations, including
14,824 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (BIGD)".
In the S protein, four amino acid alterations, V483A,
14551, F456V and G4765, are located near the binding
interface in the RBD, but their effects on binding to the
host receptor are unknown. The alteration D614G in
the S1 subunit was found far more frequently than other
S variant sites, and it is the marker ofa major subclade of
SARS-CoV-2 (clade G). Since March 2020, SARS-CoV-2
variants with G614 in the S protein have replaced the
original D614 variants and become the dominant form
circulating globally. Compared with the D614 variant,
higher viral loads were found in patients infected with
the G614 variant, but clinical data suggested no signif-
icant link between the D614G alteration and disease
severity”. Pseudotyped viruses carrying the S protein
with G614 generated higher infectious titres than viruses
carrying the S protein with D614, suggesting the altera-
tion may have increased the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2
(REF.”). However, the results of in vitro experiments based
on pseudovirus models may not exactly reflect natural
infection. This preliminary finding should be validated
by more studies using wild-type SARS-CoV-2 variants to
infect different target cells and animal models. Whether
this amino acid change enhanced virus transmissibil-
ity is also to be determined. Another marker mutation
for SARS-CoV-2 evolution is the single-nucleotide
To assess the genetic variation of different SARS-
CoV-2 strains, the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource
of China National Center for Bioinformation aligned
77,801 genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 detected glob-
ally and identified a total of 15,018 mutations, including
14,824 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (BIGD)".
In the S protein, four amino acid alterations, V483A,
14551, F456V and G4765, are located near the binding
interface in the RBD, but their effects on binding to the
host receptor are unknown. The alteration D614G in
the S1 subunit was found far more frequently than other
S variant sites, and it is the marker ofa major subclade of
SARS-CoV-2 (clade G). Since March 2020, SARS-CoV-2
variants with G614 in the S protein have replaced the
original D614 variants and become the dominant form
circulating globally. Compared with the D614 variant,
higher viral loads were found in patients infected with
the G614 variant, but clinical data suggested no signif-
icant link between the D614G alteration and disease
severity”. Pseudotyped viruses carrying the S protein
with G614 generated higher infectious titres than viruses
carrying the S protein with D614, suggesting the altera-
tion may have increased the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2
(REF.”). However, the results of in vitro experiments based
on pseudovirus models may not exactly reflect natural
infection. This preliminary finding should be validated
by more studies using wild-type SARS-CoV-2 variants to
infect different target cells and animal models. Whether
this amino acid change enhanced virus transmissibil-
ity is also to be determined. Another marker mutation
for SARS-CoV-2 evolution is the single-nucleotide
appeared asymptomatic’’. Another serological study
detected SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies in cat
serum samples collected in Wuhan after the COVID-19
outbreak, providing evidence for SARS-CoV-2 infection
in cat populations in Wuhan, although the potential
of SARS-CoV-2 transmission from cats to humans is

currently uncertain®.

Receptor use and pathogenesis

SARS-CoV-2 uses the same receptor as SARS-CoV,
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)''’. Besides
human ACE2 (hACE2), SARS-CoV-2 also recognizes
ACE2 from pig, ferret, rhesus monkey, civet, cat, pan-
golin, rabbit and dog''****”. The broad receptor usage
of SARS-CoV-2 implies that it may have a wide host
range, and the varied efficiency of ACE2 usage in differ-
ent animals may indicate their different susceptibilities
to SARS-CoV-2 infection. The $1 subunit of a corona-
virus is further divided into two functional domains,
an N-terminal domain and a C-terminal domain.
Structural and biochemical analyses identified a
211 amino acid region (amino acids 319-529) at the S1
C-terminal domain of SARS-CoV-2 as the RBD, which
has a key role in virus entry and is the target of neu-
tralizing antibodies™”' (FIG. 5a). The RBM mediates con-
tact with the ACE2 receptor (amino acids 437-507 of
SARS-CoV-2 S protein), and this region in SARS-CoV-2
differs from that in SARS-CoV in the five residues crit-
INTRODUCTION

Over the past 2 decades, coronaviruses (CoVs)
have been associated with significant disease
outbreaks in East Asia and the Middle East. The
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) began to
emerge in 2002 and 2012, respectively. Recently, a
novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), causing
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), emerged in
late 2019, and it has posed a global health threat,
causing an ongoing pandemic in many countries and
territories (1).

Health workers worldwide are currently making
efforts to control further disease outbreaks caused by
the novel CoV (originally named 2019-nCoV),
which was first identified in Wuhan City, Hubei
Province, China, on 12 December 2019. On 11
February 2020, the World Health Organization
(WHO) announced the official designation for the
current CoV-associated disease to be COVID-19,
caused by SARS-CoV-2. The primary cluster of
patients was found to be connected with the Huanan
South China Seafood Market in Wuhan (2). CoVs
belong to the family Coronaviridae (subfamily
Coronavirinae), the members of which infect a broad
range of hosts, producing symptoms and diseases
ranging from the common cold to severe and
ultimately fatal illnesses, such as SARS, MERS, and,
presently, COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2 is considered
one of the seven members of the CoV family that
infect humans (3), and it belongs to the same lineage
of CoVs that causes SARS; however, this novel virus
is genetically distinct. Until 2020, six CoVs were
known to infect humans, including human CoV 229E
(HCoV-229E), HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-
HKU1, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV. Although
SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV_ have resulted in
outbreaks with high mortality, others remain
associated with mild upper-respiratory-tract illnesses
(4).

Newly evolved CoVs pose a high threat to global
public health. The current emergence of COVID-19
is the third CoV outbreak in humans over the past 2
decades (5). It is no coincidence that Fan et al.
predicted potential SARS- or MERS-like CoV
outbreaks in China following pathogen transmission
from bats (6). COVID-19 emerged in China and
spread rapidly throughout the country and,
subsequently, to other countries. Due to the severity
of this outbreak and the potential of spreading on an
international scale, the WHO declared a global

health emeroency an 21 Janinary N00: anheennently
health emergency on 31 January 2020; subsequently,
on 11 March 2020, they declared it a pandemic
situation. At present, we are not in a position to
effectively treat COVID-19, since neither approved
vaccines nor specific antiviral drugs for treating
human CoV infections are available (7-9). Most
nations are currently making efforts to prevent the
further spreading of this potentially deadly virus by
implementing preventive and control strategies.

In domestic animals, infections with CoVs are
associated with a broad spectrum of pathological
conditions. Apart from infectious bronchitis virus,
canine respiratory CoV, and mouse hepatitis virus,
CoVs are predominantly associated with
gastrointestinal diseases (10). The emergence of
novel CoVs may have become possible because of
multiple CoVs being maintained in their natural host,
which could have favored the probability of genetic
recombination (10). High genetic diversity and the
ability to infect multiple host species are a result of
high-frequency mutations in CoVs, which occur due
to the instability of RNA-dependent RNA
polymerases along with higher rates of homologous
RNA recombination (10, 11). Identifying the origin
of SARS-CoV-2 and the pathogen’s evolution will be
helpful for disease surveillance (12), development of
new targeted drugs, and prevention of further
epidemics (13). The most common symptoms
associated with COVID-19 are fever, cough,
dyspnea, expectoration, headache, and myalgia or
fatigue.

In contrast, less common signs at the time of
hospital admission include diarrhea, hemoptysis, and
shortness of breath (14). Recently, individuals with
asymptomatic infections were also suspected of
transmitting infections, which further adds to the
complexity of disease transmission dynamics in
COVID-19 infections (1). Such efficient responses
require in-depth knowledge regarding the virus,
which currently is a novel agent; consequently,
further studies are required.

Comparing the genome of SARS-CoV-2 with that
of the closely related SARS/SARS-like CoV
revealed that the sequence coding for the spike
protein, with a total length of 1,273 amino acids,
showed 27 amino acid substitutions. Six of these
substitutions are in the region of the receptor-binding
domain (RBD), and another six substitutions are in
the underpinning subdomain (SD) (16). Phylogenetic
analyses have revealed that SARS-CoV-2 is closely
related (88% similarity) to two SARS-like CoVs
derived from bat SARS-like CoVs_ (bat-SL-
“OVZCAS | bat-SL-CoVZXC2 Fj
from SARS-CoV (79% similarity) and MERS-CoV
(nearly 50%) (17). COVID-19 is associated with
afflictions of the lungs in all cases and generated
characteristic chest computer tomography findings,
such as the presence of multiple lesions in lung lobes
that appear as dense, ground-glass opaque structures
that occasionally coexist with consolidation shadows

(18).
Some therapeutic options for treating COVID-19
showed efficacy in in vitro studies; however, to date,
these treatments have not undergone any randomized
animal or human clinical trials, which limit their
practical applicability in the current pandemic (7, 9,
19-21).

The present comprehensive review describes the
various features of SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 causing
the current disease outbreaks and advances in
diagnosis and developing vaccines and therapeutics.
It also provides a brief comparison with the earlier
SARS and MERS CoVs, the veterinary perspective
of CoVs and this emerging novel pathogen, and an
evaluation of the zoonotic potential of similar CoVs
to provide feasible One Health strategies for the
management of this fatal virus (22-367).

THE VIRUS (SARS-CoV-2)

Coronaviruses are positive-sense RNA viruses
having an extensive and promiscuous range of
natural hosts and affect multiple systems (23, 24).
Coronaviruses can cause clinical diseases in humans
that may extend from the common cold to more
severe respiratory diseases like SARS and MERS
(17, 279). The recently emerging SARS-CoV-2 has
wrought havoc in China and caused a pandemic

‘nation in_ti Idwid lati leadi
situation in the worldwide population, leading to
disease outbreaks that have not been controlled to
date, although extensive efforts are being put in
place to counter this virus (25). This virus has been
proposed to be designated/named severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
by the International Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses (ICTV), which determined the virus belongs
to the Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related
coronavirus category and found this virus is related
to SARS-CoVs (26). SARS-CoV-2 is a member of
the order WNidovirales, family Coronaviridae,
subfamily Orthocoronavirinae, which is subdivided

into four genera, viz., Alphacoronavirus,
Betacoronavirus, Gammacoronavirus, and
Deltacoronavirus (3, 27): The genera

Alphacoronavirus and Betacoronavirus originate
from bats, while =Gammacoronavirus and
Deltacoronavirus have evolved from bird and swine
gene pools (24, 28, 29, 275).

Coronaviruses possess an unsegmented, single-
stranded, positive-sense RNA genome of around 30
kb, enclosed by a 5'-cap and 3’-poly(A) tail (30). The
genome of SARS-CoV-2 is 29,891 bp long, with a
G+C content of 38% (31). These viruses are
encircled with an envelope containing — viral
nucleocapsid. The nucleocapsids in CoVs are
arranged in helical symmetry, which reflects an
atypical attribute in positive-sense RNA viruses (30).
The electron micrographs of SARS-CoV-2 revealed
a diverging spherical outline with some degree of
pleomorphism, virion diameters varying from 60 to
140 nm, and distinct spikes of 9 to 12 nm, giving the
virus the appearance of a solar corona (3). The CoV
genome is arranged linearly as 5’-leader-UTR-
replicase-structural genes (S-E-M-N)-3’ UTR-
poly(A) (32). Accessory genes, such as 3a/b, 4a/b,
and the hemagglutinin-esterase gene (HE), are also
seen intermingled with the structural genes (30).
SARS-CoV-2 has also been found to be arranged
similarly and encodes several accessory proteins,
although it lacks the HE, which is characteristic of
some betacoronaviruses (31). The positive-sense
genome of CoVs serves as the mRNA and is
translated to polyprotein 1a/lab (ppla/lab) (33). A
replication-transcription complex (RTC) is formed in
double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) by nonstructural
proteins (nsps), encoded by the polyprotein gene
(34). Subsequently, the RTC synthesizes a nested set
of subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs) via discontinuous
transcription (35).
Based on molecular characterization, SARS-
CoV-2 is considered a new _ Betacoronavirus
belonging to the subgenus Sarbecovirus (3). A few
other critical zoonotic viruses (MERS-related CoV
and SARS-related CoV) belong to the same genus.
However, SARS-CoV-2 was identified as a distinct
virus based on the percent identity with other
Betacoronavirus; conserved open reading frame la/b
(ORF la/b) is below 90% identity (3). An overall
80% nucleotide identity was observed between
SARS-CoV-2 and the original SARS-CoV, along
with 89% identity with ZC45 and ZXC21 SARS-
related CoVs of bats (2, 31, 36). In addition, 82%
identity has been observed between SARS-CoV-2
and human SARS-CoV Tor2 and human SARS-CoV
BJO1 2003 (31). A sequence identity of only 51.8%
was observed between MERS-related CoV and the
recently emerged SARS-CoV-2 (37). Phylogenetic
analysis of the structural genes also revealed that
SARS-CoV-2 is closer to bat SARS-related CoV.
Therefore, SARS-CoV-2 might have originated from
bats, while other amplifier hosts might have played a
role in disease transmission to humans (31). Of note,
the other two zoonotic CoVs (MERS-related CoV
and SARS-related CoV) also originated from bats
(38, 39). Nevertheless, for SARS and MERS, civet
cat and camels, respectively, act as amplitier hosts
(40, 41).

Coronavirus genomes and subgenomes encode
six ORFs (31). The majority of the 5’ end is occupied
by ORFla/b, which produces 16 nsps. The two
polyproteins, ppla and pplab, are initially produced
from ORFla/b by a —1 frameshift between ORFla
and ORF 1b (32). The virus-encoded proteases cleave
polyproteins into individual nsps (main protease
[Mpro], chymotrypsin-like protease [3CLpro], and
papain-like proteases [PLPs]) (42). SARS-CoV-2
also encodes these nsps, and their functions have
been elucidated recently (31). Remarkably, a
difference between SARS-CoV-2 and other CoVs is
the identification of a novel short putative protein
within the ORF3 band, a secreted protein with an
alpha helix and beta-sheet with six strands encoded
by ORF8 (31).

Coronaviruses encode four major structural
proteins, namely, spike (S), membrane (M), envelope
(E), and nucleocapsid (N), which are described in
detail below.

S Glycoprotein
Coronavirus S protein is a large, multifunctional
class I viral transmembrane protein. The size of this
class I viral transmembrane protein. The size of this
abundant S protein varies from 1,160 amino acids
(IBV, infectious bronchitis virus, in poultry) to 1,400
amino acids (FCoV, feline coronavirus) (43). It lies
in a trimer on the virion surface, giving the virion a
corona or crown-like appearance. Functionally it is
required for the entry of the infectious virion
particles into the cell through interaction with
various host cellular receptors (44).

Furthermore, it acts as a critical factor for tissue
tropism and the determination of host range (45).
Notably, S protein is one of the vital
immunodominant proteins of CoVs capable of
inducing host immune responses (45). The
ectodomains in all CoVs S proteins have similar
domain organizations, divided into two subunits, S1
and 82 (43). The first one, $1, helps in host receptor
binding, while the second one, $2, accounts for
fusion. The former (S1) is further divided into two
subdomains, namely, the N-terminal domain (NTD)
and C-terminal domain (CTD). Both of these
subdomains act as_ receptor-binding domains,
interacting efficiently with various host receptors
(45). The Sl CTD contains the receptor-binding
motif (RBM). In each coronavirus spike protein, the
trimeric S1 locates itself on top of the trimeric S2
stalk (45). Recently, structural analyses of the S
proteins of COVID-19 have revealed 27 amino acid
substitutions within a 1,273-amino-acid stretch (16).
Six substitutions are located in the RBD (amino
acids 357 to 528), while four substitutions are in the
RBM at the CTD of the S1 domain (16). Of note, no
amino acid change is seen in the RBM, which binds
directly to the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2
(ACE2) receptor in SARS-CoV (16, 46). At present,
the main emphasis is knowing how many differences
would be required to change the host tropism.
Sequence comparison revealed 17 nonsynonymous
changes between the early sequence of SARS-CoV-2
and the later isolates of SARS-CoV. The changes
were found scattered over the genome of the virus,
with nine substitutions in ORFlab, ORF8 (4
substitutions), the spike gene (3 substitutions), and
ORF7a (single substitution) (4). Notably, the same
nonsynonymous changes were found in a familial
cluster, indicating that the viral evolution happened
during person-to-person transmission (4, 47). Such
adaptive evolution events are frequent and constitute
a constantly ongoing process once the virus spreads
among new hosts (47). Even though no functional
changes occur in the virus associated with this
adaptive evolution, close monitoring of the viral
mutations that occur during subsequent human-to-
human transmission is warranted.

M Protein

The M protein is the most abundant viral protein
present in the virion particle, giving a definite shape
to the viral envelope (48). It binds to the
nucleocapsid and acts as a central organizer of
coronavirus assembly (49). Coronavirus M proteins
are highly diverse in amino acid contents but
maintain overall structural similarity within different
genera (50). The M protein has three transmembrane
domains, flanked by a short amino terminus outside
the virion and a long carboxy terminus inside the
virion (50). Overall, the viral scaffold is maintained
by M-M interaction. Of note, the M protein of
SARS-CoV-2. does not have an amino acid
substitution compared to that of SARS-CoV (16).

E Protein

The coronavirus E protein is the most enigmatic
and smallest of the major structural proteins (51). It
plays a multifunctional role in the pathogenesis,
assembly, and release of the virus (52). It is a small
integral membrane polypeptide that acts as a
viroporin (ion channel) (53). The inactivation or
virulence of coronaviruses due to changes in
morphology and tropism (54). The E protein consists
of three domains, namely, a short hydrophilic amino
terminal, a large hydrophobic transmembrane
domain, and an efficient C-terminal domain (51).
The SARS-CoV-2 E protein reveals a similar amino
acid constitution without any substitution (16).

N Protein

The N protein of coronavirus is multipurpose.
Among several functions, it plays a role in complex
formation with the viral genome, facilitates M
protein interaction needed during virion assembly,
and enhances the transcription efficiency of the virus
(55, 56). It contains three highly conserved and
distinct domains, namely, an NTD, an RNA-binding
domain or a linker region (LKR), and a CTD (57).
The NTD binds with the 3’ end of the viral genome,
perhaps via electrostatic interactions, and is highly
diverged both in length and sequence (58). The
charged LKR is serine and arginine rich and is also
known as the SR (serine and arginine) domain (59).
The LKR is capable of direct interaction with in vitro
RNA interaction and is responsible for cell signaling
(60, 61). It also modulates the antiviral response of
the host by working as an antagonist for interferon
N Protein

The N protein of coronavirus is multipurpose.
Among several functions, it plays a role in complex
formation with the viral genome, facilitates M
protein interaction needed during virion assembly,
and enhances the transcription efficiency of the virus
(55, 56). It contains three highly conserved and
distinct domains, namely, an NTD, an RNA-binding
domain or a linker region (LKR), and a CTD (57).
The NTD binds with the 3’ end of the viral genome,
perhaps via electrostatic interactions, and is highly
diverged both in length and sequence (58). The
charged LKR is serine and arginine rich and is also
known as the SR (serine and arginine) domain (59).
The LKR is capable of direct interaction with in vitro
RNA interaction and is responsible for cell signaling
(60, 61). It also modulates the antiviral response of
the host by working as an antagonist for interferon
(IFN) and RNA interference (62). Compared to that
of SARS-CoV, the N protein of SARS-CoV-2
possess five amino acid mutations, where two are in
the intrinsically dispersed region (IDR; positions 25
and 26), one each in the NTD (position 103), LKR
(position 217), and CTD (position 334) (16).

nsps and Accessory Proteins

~ 4 re | .
nsps and Accessory Proteins

Besides the important structural proteins, the
SARS-CoV-2 genome contains 15 nsps, nspl to
nsp10 and nsp12 to nsp16, and 8 accessory proteins
(3a, 3b, p6, 7a, 7b, 8b, 9b, and ORF 14) (16). All
these proteins play a specific role in viral replication
(27). Unlike the accessory proteins of SARS-CoV,
SARS-CoV-2 does not contain 8a protein and has a
longer 8b and shorter 3b protein (16). The nsp7,
nsp13, envelope, matrix, and p6 and 8b accessory
proteins have not been detected with any amino acid

substitutions compared to the sequences of other
coronaviruses (16).

The virus structure of SARS-CoV-2 is depicted in
Fig.. 2.

Spike glycoprotein (S)
(required for the entry of the
infectious virion particle)

Membrane protein (M)

(most abundant viral protein) Major structural proteins

Envelope glycoprotein (E)
(smallest among the major
structural proteins)

Nucleocapsid protein (N)
+ single-stranded positive
sense RNA genome

Lipid bilayer

FIG 2 SARS-CoV-2 virus structure.
VO ssGsslU UL ik ICULIGE CLIUCLIL & Lily
ia Bb Pe,

using the MegAlign otis program, — the
similarity between the novel SARS-CoV-2 isolates
was in the range of 99.4% to 100%. Among the other
Serbecovirus CoV sequences, the novel SARS-CoV-
2 sequences revealed the highest similarity to bat-
SL-CoV, with nucleotide percent identity ranges
between 88.12 and 89.65%. Meanwhile, earlier
reported SARS-CoVs showed 70.6 to 74.9%
similarity to SARS-CoV-2 at the nucleotide level.
Further, the nucleotide percent similarity was 55.4%,
45.5% to 47.9%, 46.2% to 46.6%, and 45.0% to
46.3% to the other four subgenera, namely,
Hibecovirus, Nobecovirus, Merbecovirus, and
Embecovirus, respectively. The percent similarity
index of current outbreak isolates indicates a close
relationship between SARS-CoV-2 isolates and bat-
SL-CoV, indicating a common origin. However,
particular pieces of evidence based on further
complete genomic analysis of current isolates are
necessary to draw any conclusions, although it was
ascertained that the current novel SARS-CoV-2
isolates belong to the subgenus Sarbecovirus in the
diverse range of betacoronaviruses. Their possible
ancestor was hypothesized to be from bat CoV
strains, wherein bats might have played a crucial role

in harboring this class of viruses.
OPllis LFEE PNYLOSEMY AMUALYSIS.

In the unrooted phylogenetic tree of different
betacoronaviruses based on the S protein, virus
sequences from different subgenera grouped into
separate clusters. SARS-CoV-2 sequences from
Wuhan and other countries exhibited a close
relationship and appeared in a single cluster (Fig. 1).
The CoVs from the subgenus Sarbecovirus appeared
jointly in SplitsTree and divided into three
subclusters, namely, SARS-CoV-2, bat-SARS-like-
CoV (bat-SL-CoV), and SARS-CoV (Fig. 1). In the
case of other subgenera, like Merbecovirus, all of the
sequences grouped in a single cluster, whereas in
Embecovirus, different species, comprised of canine
respiratory CoVs, bovine CoVs, equine CoVs, and
human CoV strain (OC43), grouped in a common
cluster. Isolates in the subgenera Nobecovorus and
Hibecovirus were found to be placed separately
away from other reported SARS-CoVs but shared a
bat origin.

CURRENT WORLDWIDE SCENARIO OF
SARS-CoV-2

This novel virus, SARS-CoV-2, comes under the
subgenus Sarbecovirus of the Orthocoronavirinae
subfamily and is entirely different from the viruses
responsible for MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV (3). The
newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 is a group 2B
coronavirus (2). The genome sequences of SARS-
CoV-2 obtained from patients share 79.5% sequence
similarity to the sequence of SARS-CoV (63).

As of 13 May 2020, a total of 4,170,424
confirmed cases of COVID-19 (with 287,399 deaths)
have been reported in more than 210 affected
countries worldwide (WHO Situation Report 114
Initially, the epicenter of the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic was China, which reported a significant
number of deaths associated with COVID-19, with
84,458 laboratory-confirmed cases and 4,644 deaths
as of 13 May 2020 (Fig. 4). As of 13 May 2020,
SARS-CoV-2 confirmed cases have been reported in
more than 210 countries apart from China (Fig. 3
and 4) (WHO Situation Report 114) (25, 64).
COVID-19 has been reported on all continents
except Antarctica. For many weeks, Italy was the
focus of concerns regarding the large number of
cases, with 221,216 cases and 30,911 deaths, but
now, the United States is the country with the largest
number of cases, 1,322,054, and 79,634 deaths.
Now, the United Kingdom has even more cases
(226,4671) and deaths (32,692) than Italy. A John
Hopkins University web platform has provided daily
updates on the basic epidemiology of the COVID-19
outbreak
ship, named Diamond Princess, quarantined in
Japanese waters (Port of Yokohama), as well as on
other cruise ships around the world (239) (Fig. 3).
The significant events of the SARS-CoV-2/COVID-
19 virus outbreak occurring since 8 December 2019
are presented as a timeline in Fig. 5.

Major events of current coronavirus COVID-19 disease outbreak

(03 Feb, 2020
8 Jan, 2020 + First complete genome from Japan_| [711 Feb, 2020
5 Jan, 2020 CCDC announces a + 3,711 passengersand crew were | |. WHO names the
31 Dec, 2019 Wuhan health committee novel coronavirus 24 Jan, 2020 quarantined by the Japanese disease COVID-19
Wuhan notes 27, exclude SARS and MERS as isolated from Wuhan | | First complete Ministry of Health on Diamond + Virus was named
pneumonia cases | | possible cause of pneumonia | | pneumonia patient | | genomefrom USA | | Princess cruise ship SARS-CoV-2 by ICTV

8 Dec, 2019 ‘Jan, 2020 7 Jan, 2020 10,Jan, 2020 30 Jan, 2020 02 Feb, 2020
Symptom onset of China closes Wuhan | | First cell cultureisolation | | First genome released by | |WHOdeclaresitaPublic| | First death reported

the 41 confirmed seafood market d idan University China Health Emergency of outside of China, in
2019-nCoV cases in GenBank International Concern Philippines

(05 Apr, 2020

13May,2020 | | The Uni

Total confirmed s 27 Mar, 2020 (06 Mar, 2020

cases reach Laboratories confirms Belgium health +3533 people (including 21 20 Feb, 2020 14 Feb, 2020

4170424 with | | SARS-CoV-2intigerand | | authorities report positive) on board cruise ship |__| First death (n=02) Second death outside China

287399 destte possible transmission of | | Grand Princess quarantined off | | reportedon Diamond | | was reported in Japan having

worldwide COVID-19 to domestic cat | | the coast of California (US) Princess cruise ship no travel history to China

22 Apr, 2020 (02 Apr, 2020 11 Mar, 2020 28 Feb, 2020 16 Feb, 2020 13 Feb, 2020

The US.CDC and the USDA National | | Total confirmed cases WHO declares covio-19 | | Hong Kong authorities Fitst death reported First complete genome
Veterinary Services Laboratories reaches 896,450 with as global pandemic report possible transmission from Europe in France from Taiwan

(NVSL) confirms cases of SARS-CoV-2 | | 45,526 deaths worldwide of COVID-19 to pet dogs

intwo pet cats

FIG 5 Timeline depicting the significant events that
occurred during the SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 virus
outbreak. The timeline describes the significant events
during the current SARS-CoV-2 outbreak, from 8
December 2019 to 13 May 2020.

At the beginning, China experienced the majority
of the burden associated with COVID-19 in the form
of disease morbidity and mortality (65), but over
time the COVID-19 menace moved to Europe,
particularly Italy and Spain, and now the United
States has the hichest number of confirmed cases
associated with severe economic impacts globally
due to the sudden interruption of global trade and
supply chains that forced multinational companies to
make decisions that led to significant economic
losses (66). The recent increase in the number of
confirmed critically ill patients with COVID-19 has
already surpassed the intensive care supplies,
limiting intensive care services to only a small
portion of critically ill patients (67). This might also
have contributed to the increased case fatality rate
observed in the COVID-19 outbreak.

Viewpoint on SARS-CoV-2 Transmission,
Spread, and Emergence

The novel coronavirus was identified within 1
month (28 days) of the outbreak. This is impressively
fast compared to the time taken to identify SARS-
CoV reported in Foshan, Guangdong Province,
China (125days) (68). Immediately after the
confirmation of viral etiology, the Chinese
virologists rapidly released the genomic sequence of
SARS-CoV-2, which played a crucial role in
controlling the spread of this newly emerged novel
coronavirus to other parts of the world (69). The
possible origin of SARS-CoV-2 and the first mode of
disease transmission are not yet identified (70).
Analysis of the initial cluster of infections suggests
that the infected individuals had a common exposure
point, a seafood market in Wuhan, Hubei Province,
China (Fig. 6). The restaurants of this market are
well-known for providing different types of wild
animals for human consumption (71). The Huanan
South China Seafood Market also sells live animals,
such as poultry, bats, snakes, and marmots (72). This
might be the point where zoonotic (animal-to-
human) transmission occurred (71). Although
SARS-CoV-2 is alleged to have originated from an
animal host (zoonotic origin) with further human-to-
human transmission (Fig. 6), the likelihood of
foodborne transmission should be ruled out with
further investigations, since it is a latent possibility
(1). Additionally, other potential and expected routes
would be associated with transmission, as in other
respiratory viruses, by direct contact, such as shaking
contaminated hands, or by direct contact with
contaminated surfaces (Fig. 6). Still, whether blood
transfusion and organ transplantation (276), as well
as transplacental and perinatal routes, are possible
routes for SARS-CoV-2 transmission needs to be
determined (Fig. 6).
associated with known emerging viruses, higher
pathogenicity of a virus is often associated with
lower transmissibility. Compared to emerging
viruses like Ebola virus, avian H7N9, SARS-CoV,
and MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 has relatively lower
pathogenicity and moderate transmissibility (15).
The risk of death among individuals infected with
COVID-19 was calculated using the infection
fatality risk (IFR). The IFR was found to be in the
range of 0.3% to 0.6%, which is comparable to that
of a previous Asian influenza pandemic (1957 to
1958) (73, 277).

Notably, the reanalysis of the COVID-19
pandemic curve from the initial cluster of cases
pointed to considerable human-to-human
transmission. It is opined that the exposure history of
SARS-CoV-2 at the Wuhan seafood market
originated from human-to-human transmission rather
than animal-to-human transmission (74); however, in
light of the zoonotic spillover in COVID-19, is too
early to fully endorse this idea (1). Following the
initial infection, human-to-human transmission has
been observed with a preliminary reproduction
number (Ro) estimate of 1.4 to 2.5 (70, 75), and
recently it is estimated to be 2.24 to 3.58 (76). In
another study, the average reproductive number of
COVID-19 was found to be 3.28, which is
significantly higher than the initial WHO estimate of
1.4 to 2.5 (77). It is too early to obtain the exact Ro
value, since there is a possibility of bias due to
insufficient data. The higher Ro value is indicative of
the more significant potential of SARS-CoV-2
transmission in a susceptible population. This is not
the first time where the culinary practices of China
have been blamed for the origin of novel coronavirus
infection in humans. Previously, the animals present
in the live-animal market were identified to be the
intermediate hosts of the SARS outbreak in China
(78). Several wildlife species were found to harbor
potentially evolving coronavirus strains that can
overcome the species barrier (79). One of the main
principles of Chinese food culture is that live-
slaughtered animals are considered more nutritious
(5).

After 4 months of struggle that lasted from
December 2019 to March 2020, the COVID-19
situation now seems under control in China. The wet
animal markets have reopened, and people have
started buying bats, dogs, cats, birds, scorpions,
badgers, rabbits, pangolins (scaly anteaters), minks,
soup from palm civet, ostriches, hamsters, snapping
turtles, ducks, fish, Siamese crocodiles, and other
animal meats without any fear of COVID-19. The
Chinese government is encouraging people to feel
they can return to normalcy. However, this could be
a risk, as it has been mentioned in advisories that
people should avoid contact with live-dead animals
as much as possible, as SARS-CoV-2 has shown
zoonotic spillover. Additionally, we cannot rule out
the possibility of new mutations in the same virus
being closely related to contact with both animals
and humans at the market (284). In January 2020,
China imposed a temporary ban on the sale of live-
dead animals in wet markets. However, now
hundreds of such wet markets have been reopened
without optimizing standard food safety and
sanitation practices (286).

With China being the most populated country in
the world and due to its domestic and international
food exportation policies, the whole world is now
facing the menace of COVID-19, including China
itself. Wet markets of live-dead animals do not
maintain strict food hygienic practices. Fresh blood
splashes are present everywhere, on the floor and
tabletops, and such food customs could encourage
many pathogens to adapt, mutate, and jump the
species barrier. As a result, the whole world is
suffering from novel SARS-CoV-2, with more than
4,170,424 cases and 287,399 deaths across the globe.
There is an urgent need for a rational international

campaign against the unhealthy food practices of
China to encourage the sellers to increase hygienic
food practices or close the crude live-dead animal
wet markets. There is a need to modify food policies
at national and international levels to avoid further
life threats and economic consequences from any
emerging or reemerging pandemic due to close
animal-human interaction (285).

Even though individuals of all ages and sexes are
susceptible to COVID-19, older people with an
underlying chronic disease are more likely to
become severely infected (80). Recently, individuals
with asymptomatic infection were also found to act
as a source of infection to susceptible individuals
(81). Both the asymptomatic and symptomatic
patients secrete similar viral loads, which indicates
that the transmission capacity of asymptomatic or
minimally symptomatic patients is very high. Thus,
SARS-CoV-2 transmission can happen early in the
course of infection (82). Atypical clinical
manifestations have also been reported in COVID-19
in which the only reporting symptom was fatigue.
Such patients may lack respiratory signs, such as
fever, cough, and sputum (83). Hence, the clinicians

must be on the look-out for the possible occurrence
of atypical clinical manifestations to avoid the
possibility of missed diagnosis. The early
transmission ability of SARS-CoV-2 was found to be
similar to or slightly higher than that of SARS-CoV,
reflecting that it could be controlled despite
moderate to high transmissibility (84).

Increasing reports of SARS-CoV-2 in sewage and
wastewater warrants the need for further
investigation due to the possibility of fecal-oral
transmission. SARS-CoV-2 present in environmental
compartments such as soil and water will finally end
up in the wastewater and sewage sludge of treatment
plants (328). Therefore, we have to reevaluate the
current wastewater and sewage sludge treatment
procedures and introduce advanced techniques that
are specific and effective against SARS-CoV-2.
Since there is active shedding of SARS-CoV-2 in the
stool, the prevalence of infections in a_ large
population can be studied using wastewater-based
epidemiology. Recently, reverse  transcription-
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was used to enumerate
the copies of SARS-CoV-2 RNA concentrated from
wastewater collected from a wastewater treatment
plant (327). The calculated viral RNA copy numbers
determine the number of infected individuals. The

rf e rf
nucleic acid test results as one of the additional
discharge criteria in laboratory-confirmed cases of
COVID-19 (326).

The COVID-19 pandemic does not have any
novel factors, other than the genetically unique
pathogen and a further possible reservoir. The cause
and the likely future outcome are just repetitions of
our previous interactions with fatal coronaviruses.
The only difference is the time of occurrence and the
genetic distinctness of the pathogen involved.
Mutations on the RBD of CoVs facilitated their
capability of infecting newer hosts, thereby
expanding their reach to all corners of the world
(85). This is a potential threat to the health of both
animals and humans. Advanced studies using
Bayesian phylogeographic reconstruction identified
the most probable origin of SARS-CoV-2 as the bat
SARS-like coronavirus, circulating in the
Rhinolophus bat family (86).

Phylogenetic analysis of 10 whole-genome
sequences of SARS-CoV-2 showed that they are
related to two CoVs of bat origin, namely, bat-SL-
CoVZC45 and bat-SL-CoVZXC21, which were
reported during 2018 in China (17). It was reported
that SARS-CoV-2 had been confirmed to use ACE2
as an entry receptor while exhibiting an RBD similar
to that of SARS-CoV (17, 87, 254, 255). Several
countries have provided recommendations to their
people traveling to China (88, 89). Compared to the
previous coronavirus outbreaks caused by SARS-
CoV and MERS-CoV, the efficiency of SARS-CoV-
2 human-to-human transmission was thought to be
less. This assumption was based on the finding that
health workers were affected less than they were in
previous outbreaks of fatal coronaviruses (2).
Superspreading events are considered the main
culprit for the extensive transmission of SARS and
MERS (90, 91). Almost half of the MERS-CoV
cases reported in Saudi Arabia are of secondary
origin that occurred through contact with infected
asymptomatic or symptomatic individuals through
human-to-human transmission (92). The occurrence
of superspreading events in the COVID-19 outbreak
cannot be ruled out until its possibility is evaluated.
Like SARS and MERS, COVID-19 can also infect
the lower respiratory tract, with milder symptoms
(27). The basic reproduction number of COVID-19
has been found to be in the range of 2.8 to 3.3 based
on real-time reports and 3.2 to 3.9 based on predicted
infected cases (84).
Coronaviruses in Humans—SARS, MERS,
and COVID-19

Coronavirus infection in humans is commonly
associated with mild to severe respiratory diseases,
with high fever, severe inflammation, cough, and
internal organ dysfunction that can even lead to
death (92). Most of the identified coronaviruses
cause the common cold in humans. However, this
changed when SARS-CoV was identified, paving the
way for severe forms of the disease in humans (22).
Our previous experience with the outbreaks of other
coronaviruses, like SARS and MERS, suggests that
the mode of transmission in COVID-19 as mainly
human-to-human transmission via direct contact,
droplets, and fomites (25). Recent studies have
demonstrated that the virus could remain viable for
hours in aerosols and up to days on surfaces; thus,
aerosol and fomite contamination could play potent
roles in the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (257).

The immune response against coronavirus is vital
to control and get rid of the infection. However,
maladjusted immune responses may contribute to the
immunopathology of the disease, resulting in
impairment of pulmonary gas __ exchange.
Understanding the interaction between CoVs and
host innate immune systems could enlighten our
with this infection (24).

SARS is a viral respiratory disease caused by a
formerly unrecognized animal CoV that originated
from the wet markets in southern China after
adapting to the human host, thereby enabling
transmission between humans (90). The SARS
outbreak reported in 2002 to 2003 had 8,098
confirmed cases with 774 total deaths (9.6%) (93).
The outbreak severely affected the Asia Pacific
region, especially mainland China (94). Even though
the case fatality rate (CFR) of SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19) is lower than that of SARS-CoV, there
exists a severe concern linked to this outbreak due to
its epidemiological similarity to influenza viruses
(95, 279). This can fail the public health system,
resulting in a pandemic (96).

MERS is another respiratory disease that was
first reported in Saudi Arabia during the year 2012.
The disease was found to have a CFR of around 35%
(97). The analysis of available data sets suggests that
the incubation period of SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV,
and MERS-CoV is in almost the same range. The
longest predicted incubation time of SARS-CoV-2 is
14 days. Hence, suspected individuals are isolated
for 14 days to avoid the risk of further spread (98).
Even though a high similarity has been reported
between the genome sequence of the new
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) and SARS-like CoVs,
the comparative analysis recognized a furin-like
cleavage site in the SARS-CoV-2 S protein that is
missing from other SARS-like CoVs (99). The furin-
like cleavage site is expected to play a role in the life
cycle of the virus and disease pathogenicity and
might even act as a therapeutic target for furin
inhibitors. The highly contagious nature of SARS-
CoV-2 compared to that of its predecessors might be
the result of a stabilizing mutation that occurred in
the endosome-associated-protein-like domain of
nsp2 protein.

Similarly, the destabilizing mutation near the
phosphatase domain of nsp3 proteins in SARS-CoV-
2 could indicate a potential mechanism that
differentiates it from other CoVs (100). Even though
the CFR reported for COVID-19 is meager
compared to those of the previous SARS and MERS
outbreaks, it has caused more deaths than SARS and
MERS combined (101). Possibly related to the viral
pathogenesis is the recent finding of an 832-
nucleotide (nt) deletion in ORF8, which appears to
reduce the replicative fitness of the virus and leads to
attenuated phenotypes of SARS-CoV-2 (256).

Coronavirus is the most prominent example of a
virus that has crossed the species barrier twice from
wild animals to humans during SARS and MERS
outbreaks (79, 102). The possibility of crossing the
species barrier for the third time has also been
suspected in the case of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19).
Bats are recognized as a possible natural reservoir
host of both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection.
In contrast, the possible intermediary host is the
palm civet for SARS-CoV and the dromedary camel
for MERS-CoV infection (102). Bats are considered
the ancestral hosts for both SARS and MERS (103).
Bats are also considered the reservoir host of human
coronaviruses like HCoV-229E and HCoV-NL63
(104). In the case of COVID-19, there are two
possibilities for primary transmission: it can be
transmitted either through intermediate hosts, similar
to that of SARS and MERS, or directly from bats
(103). The emergence paradigm put forward in the
SARS outbreak suggests that SARS-CoV originated
from bats (reservoir host) and later jumped to civets
(intermediate host) and incorporated changes within
the receptor-binding domain (RBD) to improve
binding to civet ACE2. This civet-adapted virus,
during their subsequent exposure to humans at live
markets, promoted further adaptations that resulted
in the epidemic strain (104). Transmission can also
in the epidemic strain (1U4). 1ransmission can also
occur directly from the reservoir host to humans
without RBD adaptations. The bat coronavirus that is
currently in circulation maintains specific “poised”
spike proteins that facilitate human infection without
the requirement of any mutations or adaptations
(105). Altogether, different species of bats carry a
massive number of coronaviruses around the world
(106).

The high plasticity in receptor usage, along with
the feasibility of adaptive mutation and
recombination, may result in frequent interspecies
transmission of coronavirus from bats to animals and
humans (106). The pathogenesis of most bat
coronaviruses is unknown, as most of these viruses
are not isolated and studied (4). Hedgehog
coronavirus HKU31, a Betacoronavirus, has been
identified from amur hedgehogs in China. Studies
show that hedgehogs are the reservoir of
Betacoronavirus, and there is evidence of
recombination (107).

The current scientific evidence available on
MERS infection suggests that the significant
reservoir host, as well as the animal source of MERS
infection in humans, is the dromedary camels (97).
The infected dromedary camels may not show any

‘sible © infact king it challengi
identify animals actively excreting MERS-CoV that
has the potential to infect humans. However, they
may shed MERS-CoV through milk, urine, feces,
and nasal and eye discharge and can also be found in
the raw organs (108). In a study conducted to
evaluate the susceptibility of animal species to
MERS-CoV infection, llamas and pigs were found to
be susceptible, indicating the possibility of MERS-
CoV circulation in animal species other than
dromedary camels (109).

Following the outbreak of SARS in China,
SARS-CoV-like viruses were isolated from
Himalayan palm civets (Paguma larvata) and
raccoon dogs (Nyctereutes procyonoides) found in a
live-animal market in Guangdong, China. The
animal isolates obtained from the live-animal market
retained a 29-nucleotide sequence that was not
present in most of the human isolates (78). These
findings were critical in identifying the possibility of
interspecies transmission in SARS-CoV. The higher
diversity and prevalence of bat coronaviruses in this
region compared to those in previous reports indicate
a host/pathogen coevolution. SARS -like
coronaviruses also have been found circulating in the
Chinese horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus _ sinicus)
populations. The in vitro and in vivo studies carried

out on the isolated virus confirmed that there is a
potential risk for the reemergence of SARS-CoV
infection from the viruses that are currently
circulating in the bat population (105).

CLINICAL PATHOLOGY OF SARS-CoV-2

(COVID-19)

The disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 is also
named severe specific contagious pneumonia
(SSCP), Wuhan pneumonia, and, recently, COVID-
19 (110). Compared to SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2
has less severe pathogenesis but has superior
transmission capability, as evidenced by the rapidly
increasing number of COVID-19 cases (111). The
incubation period of SARS-CoV-2 in familial
clusters was found to be 3 to 6 days (112). The mean
incubation period of COVID-19 was found to be 6.4
days, ranging from 2.1 to 11.1 days (113). Among an
early affected group of 425 patients, 59 years was the
median age, of which more males were affected
(114). Similar to SARS and MERS, the severity of
this nCoV is high in age groups above 50 years (2,
115). Symptoms of COVID-19 include fever, cough,
myalgia or fatigue, and, less commonly, headache,
hemoptysis, and diarrhea (116, 282). Compared to
the SARS-CoV-2-infected patients in Wuhan during
symptoms were noticed in those patients that are
infected by human-to-human transmission (14).

The initial trends suggested that the mortality
associated with COVID-19 was less than that of
previous outbreaks of SARS (101). The updates
obtained from countries like China, Japan, Thailand,
and South Korea indicated that the COVID-19
patients had relatively mild manifestations compared
to those with SARS and MERS (4). Regardless of
the coronavirus type, immune cells, like mast cells,
that are present in the submucosa of the respiratory
tract and nasal cavity are considered the primary
barrier against this virus (92). Advanced in-depth
analysis of the genome has identified 380 amino acid
substitutions between the amino acid sequences of
SARS-CoV-2 and the SARS/SARS-like
coronaviruses. These differences in the amino acid
sequences might have contributed to the difference
in the pathogenic divergence of SARS-CoV-2 (16).
Further research is required to evaluate the possible
differences in tropism, pathogenesis, and
transmission of this novel agent associated with this
change in the amino acid sequence. With the current
outbreak of COVID-19, there is an expectancy of a
significant increase in the number of published
studies about this emerging coronavirus, as occurred
SARS-CoV-2 invades the lung parenchyma,
resulting in severe interstitial inflammation of the
lungs. This is evident on computed tomography (CT)
images as ground-glass opacity in the lungs. This
lesion initially involves a single lobe but later
expands to multiple lung lobes (118). The
histological assessment of lung biopsy samples
obtained from COVID-19-infected patients revealed
diffuse alveolar damage, cellular fibromyxoid
exudates, hyaline membrane formation, and
desquamation of pneumocytes, indicative of acute
respiratory distress syndrome (119). It was also
found that the SARS-CoV-2-infected patients often
have lymphocytopenia with or without leukocyte
abnormalities. The degree of lymphocytopenia gives
an idea about disease prognosis, as it is found to be
positively correlated with disease severity (118).
Pregnant women are considered to have a higher risk
of getting infected by COVID-19. The coronaviruses
can cause adverse outcomes for the fetus, such as
intrauterine growth restriction, spontaneous abortion,
preterm delivery, and perinatal death.

Nevertheless, the possibility of intrauterine
maternal-fetal transmission (vertical transmission) of
CoVs is low and was not seen during either the
SARS- or MERS-CoV outbreak (120). However,
there has been concern regarding the impact of
SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 on pregnancy. Researchers
have mentioned the probability of in utero
transmission of novel SARS-CoV-2 from COVID-
19-infected mothers to their neonates in China based
upon the rise in IgM and IgG antibody levels and
cytokine values in the blood obtained from newborn
infants immediately postbirth; however, RI-PCR
failed to confirm the presence of SARS-CoV-2
genetic material in the infants (283). Recent studies
show that at least in some cases, preterm delivery
and its consequences are associated with the virus.
Nonetheless, some cases have raised doubts for the
likelihood of vertical transmission (240—243).
COVID-19 infection was associated with
pneumonia, and some developed acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS). The blood biochemistry
indexes, such as albumin, lactate dehydrogenase, C-
reactive protein, lymphocytes (percent), and
neutrophils (percent) give an idea about the disease
severity in COVID-19 infection (121). During
COVID-19, patients may present leukocytosis,
leukopenia with lymphopenia (244),
hypoalbuminemia, and an increase of lactate
dehydrogenase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
aminotransferase, bilirubin, and, expecially, D-dimer

SPR AAN We VGW 4 +17 171 1 "114
(244). Middle-aged and elderly patients with primary
chronic diseases, especially high blood pressure and
diabetes, were found to be more susceptible to
respiratory failure and, therefore, had poorer
prognoses. Providing respiratory support at early
stages improved the disease prognosis and facilitated
recovery (18). The ARDS in COVID-19 is due to the
occurrence of cytokine storms that results in
exaggerated immune response, immune regulatory
network imbalance, and, finally, miultiple-organ
failure (122). In addition to the exaggerated
inflammatory response seen in patients with
COVID-19 pneumonia, the bile duct epithelial cell-
derived hepatocytes upregulate ACE2 expression in
liver tissue by compensatory proliferation that might
result in hepatic tissue injury (123).

CORONAVIRUSES IN ANIMALS AND
ZOONOTIC LINKS—A BRIEF
VIEWPOINT

Coronavirus can cause disease in several species
of domestic and wild animals, as well as humans
(23). The different animal species that are infected
with CoV include horses, camels, cattle, swine, dogs,
cats, rodents, birds, ferrets, minks, bats, rabbits,
snakes, and various other wild animals (20, 30, 79,
93, 124, 125, 287). Coronavirus infection is linked to
different kinds of clinical manifestations, varying
from enteritis in cows and pigs, upper respiratory
disease in chickens, and fatal respiratory infections
in humans (30).

Among the CoV genera, Alphacoronavirus and
Betacoronavirus infect mammals, while
Gammacoronavirus and Deltacoronavirus mainly
infect birds, fishes, and, sometimes, mammals (27,
29, 106). Several novel coronaviruses that come
under the genus Deltacoronavirus have been
discovered in the past from birds, like Wigeon
coronavirus HKU20, Bulbul coronavirus HKU11,
Munia coronavirus HKU13, white-eye coronavirus
HKU16, night-heron coronavirus HKU19, and
common moorhen coronavirus HKU21, as well as
from pigs (porcine coronavirus HKU15) (6, 29).
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), porcine
epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), and _ porcine
hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (PHEV)
are some of the coronaviruses of swine. Among
them, TGEV and PEDV are responsible for causing
severe gastroenteritis in young piglets with
noteworthy morbidity and mortality. Infection with
PHEV also causes enteric infection but can cause
encephalitis due to its ability to infect the nervous
Bovine coronaviruses (BoCoVs) are known to
infect several domestic and wild ruminants (126).
BoCoV inflicts neonatal calf diarrhea in adult cattle,
leading to bloody diarrhea (winter dysentery) and
respiratory disease complex (shipping fever) in cattle
of all age groups (126). BoCoV-like viruses have
been noted in humans, suggesting its zoonotic
potential as well (127). Feline enteric and feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP) viruses are the two major
feline CoVs (128), where feline CoVs can affect the
gastrointestinal tract, abdominal cavity (peritonitis),
respiratory tract, and central nervous system (128).
Canines are also affected by CoVs that fall under
different genera, namely, canine enteric coronavirus
in Alphacoronavirus and canine __ respiratory
coronavirus in Betacoronavirus, affecting the enteric
and respiratory tract, respectively (129, 130). IBV,
under Gammacoronavirus, causes diseases of
respiratory, urinary, and reproductive systems, with
substantial economic losses in chickens (131, 132).
In small laboratory animals, mouse hepatitis virus,
rat sialodacryoadenitis coronavirus, and guinea pig
and rabbit coronaviruses are the major CoVs
associated with disease manifestations like enteritis,
hepatitis, and respiratory infections (10, 133).

Swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus

(SADS-CoV) was first identified in suckling piglets
having severe enteritis and belongs to the genus
Alphacoronavirus (106). The outbreak was
associated with considerable scale mortality of
piglets (24,693 deaths) across four farms in China
(134). The virus isolated from the piglets was almost
identical to and had 95% genomic similarity with
horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus species) coronavirus
HKU2, suggesting a bat origin of the pig virus (106,
134, 135). It is also imperative to note that the
SADS-CoV outbreak started in Guangdong province,
near the location of the SARS pandemic origin
(134). Before this outbreak, pigs were not known to
be infected with bat-origin coronaviruses. This
indicates that the bat-origin coronavirus jumped to
pig by breaking the species barrier. The next step of
this jump might not end well, since pigs are
considered the mixing vessel for influenza A viruses
due to their ability to be infected by both human and
avian influenza A viruses (136).

Similarly, they may act as the mixing vessel for
coronaviruses, since they are in frequent contact with
both humans and multiple wildlife species.
Additionally, pigs are also found to be susceptible to
infection with human SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV,
making this scenario a nightmare (109, 137). It is
coronavirus results in an epidemic by jumping the
so-called species barrier (287).

The host spectrum of coronavirus increased when
a novel coronavirus, namely, SW1, was recognized
in the liver tissue of a captive beluga whale
(Delphinapterus leucas) (138). In recent decades,
several novel coronaviruses were identified from
different animal species. Bats can harbor these
viruses without manifesting any clinical disease but
are persistently infected (30). They are the only
mammals with the capacity for self-powered flight,
which enables them to migrate long distances, unlike
land mammals. Bats are distributed worldwide and
also account for about a fifth of all mammalian
species (6). This makes them the ideal reservoir host
for many viral agents and also the source of novel
coronaviruses that have yet to be identified. It has
become a necessity to study the diversity of
coronavirus in the bat population to prevent future
outbreaks that could jeopardize livestock and public
health. The repeated outbreaks caused by bat-origin
coronaviruses calls for the development of efficient
molecular surveillance strategies for studying
Betacoronavirus among animals (12), especially in
the Rhinolophus bat family (86). Chinese bats have
high commercial value, since they are used in
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Therefore, the
handling of bats for trading purposes poses a
considerable risk of transmitting zoonotic CoV
epidemics (139).

Due to the possible role played by farm and wild
animals in SARS-CoV-2 infection, the WHO, in
their novel coronavirus (COVID-19) situation report,
recommended the avoidance of unprotected contact
with both farm and wild animals (25). The live-
animal markets, like the one in Guangdong, China,
provides a setting for animal coronaviruses to
amplify and to be transmitted to new hosts, like
humans (78). Such markets can be considered a
critical place for the origin of novel zoonotic
diseases and have enormous public health
significance in the event of an outbreak. Bats are the
reservoirs for several viruses; hence, the role of bats
in the present outbreak cannot be ruled out (140). In
a qualitative study conducted for evaluating the
zoonotic risk factors among rural communities of
southern China, the frequent human-animal
interactions along with the low levels of
environmental biosecurity were identified as
significant risks for the emergence of zoonotic
disease in local communities (141, 142).

The comprehensive sequence analysis of the
SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome identified that the CoV
from Wuhan is a recombinant virus of the bat
coronavirus and another coronavirus of unknown
origin. The recombination was found to have
happened within the viral spike glycoprotein, which
recognizes the cell surface receptor. Further analysis
of the genome based on codon usage identified the
snake as the most probable animal reservoir of
SARS-CoV-2 (143). Contrary to these findings,
another genome analysis proposed that the genome
of SARS-CoV-2 is 96% identical to bat coronavirus,
reflecting its origin from bats (63). The involvement
of bat-derived materials in causing the current
outbreak cannot be ruled out. High risk is involved
in the production of bat-derived materials for TCM
practices involving the handling of wild bats. The
use of bats for TCM practices will remain a severe
risk for the occurrence of zoonotic coronavirus
epidemics in the future (139).

Furthermore, the pangolins are an endangered
species of animals that harbor a wide variety of
viruses, including coronaviruses (144). The
coronavirus isolated from Malayan pangolins (Manis
javanica) showed a very high amino acid identity
with COVID-19 at E (100%), M (98.2%), N
(96.7%), and S genes (90.4%). The RBD of S protein
in CoV isolated from pangolin was almost identical
(one amino acid difference) to that of SARS-CoV-2.
A comparison of the genomes _ suggests
recombination between pangolin-CoV-like viruses
with the bat-CoV-RaTG13-like virus. All this
suggests the potential of pangolins to act as the
intermediate host of SARS-CoV-2 (145).
Human-wildlife interactions, which § are
increasing in the context of climate change (142), are
further considered high risk and responsible for the
emergence of SARS-CoV. COVID-19 is also
suspected of having a similar mode of origin. Hence,
to prevent the occurrence of another zoonotic
spillover (1), exhaustive coordinated efforts are
needed to identify the high-risk pathogens harbored
by wild animal populations, conducting surveillance
among the people who are susceptible to zoonotic
spillover events (12), and to improve the biosecurity
measures associated with the wildlife trade (146).
The serological surveillance studies conducted in
people living in proximity to bat caves had earlier
identified the serological confirmation of SARS-
related CoVs in humans. People living at the
wildlife-human interface, mainly in rural China, are
regularly exposed to SARS-related CoVs (147).
These findings will not have any significance until a
significant outbreak occurs due to a virus-like
SARS-CoV-2.

There is a steady increase in the reports of
COVID-19 in companion and wild animals around
the world. Further studies are required to evaluate
the potential of animals (especially companion
animals) to serve as an efficient reservoir host that
can further alter the dynamics of human-to-human
transmission (330). To date, two pet dogs (Hong
Kong) and four pet cats (one each from Belgium and
Hong Kong, two from the United States) have tested
positive for SARS-CoV-2 (335). The World
Organization for Animal Health (OIE) has confirmed
the diagnosis of COVID-19 in both dogs and cats
due to human-to-animal transmission (331). The
similarity observed in the gene sequence of SARS-
CoV-2 from an infected pet owner and his dog
further confirms the occurrence of human-to-animal
transmission (333). Even though asymptomatic,
feline species should be considered a_ potential
transmission route from animals to humans (326).
However, currently, there are no reports of SARS-
CoV-2 transmission from felines to human beings.
Based on the current evidence, we can conclude that
cats are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 and can get
infected by human beings. However, evidence of cat-

to-human transmission is lacking and requires
further studies (332). Rather than waiting for firmer
evidence on animal-to-human transmission,
necessary preventive measures are advised, as well
as following social distancing practices among
companion animals of different households (331).
One of the leading veterinary diagnostic companies,
IDEXX, has conducted large-scale testing for
COVID-19 in specimens collected from dogs and
cats. However, none of the tests turned out to be
positive (334).

In a study conducted to investigate the potential
of different animal species to act as the intermediate
host of SARS-CoV-2, it was found that both ferrets
and cats can be infected via experimental inoculation
of the virus. In addition, infected cats efficiently
transmitted the disease to naive cats (329). SARS-
CoV-2 infection and subsequent transmission in
ferrets were found to recapitulate the clinical aspects
of COVID-19 in humans. The infected ferrets also
shed virus via multiple routes, such as saliva, nasal
washes, feces, and urine, postinfection, making them
an ideal animal model for studying disease
transmission (337). Experimental inoculation was
also done in other animal species and found that the
dogs have low susceptibility, while the chickens,
ducks, and pigs are not at all susceptible to SARS-
CoV-2 (329).

Similarly, the National Veterinary Services
Laboratories of the USDA have reported COVID-19
in tigers and lions that exhibited respiratory signs
like dry cough and wheezing. The zoo animals are
suspected to have been infected by an asymptomatic
zookeeper (335). The total number of COVID-19-
positive cases in human beings is increasing at a high
rate, thereby creating ideal conditions for viral
spillover to other species, such as pigs. The evidence
obtained from SARS-CoV suggests that pigs can get
infected with SARS-CoV-2 (336). However,
experimental inoculation with SARS-CoV-2 failed to
infect pigs (329).

Further studies are required to identify the
possible animal reservoirs of SARS-CoV-2 and the
seasonal variation in the circulation of these viruses
in the animal population. Research collaboration
between human and animal health sectors is
becoming a necessity to evaluate and identify the
possible risk factors of transmission between animals
and humans. Such cooperation will help to devise
efficient strategies for the management of emerging
zoonotic diseases (12).
DIAGNOSIS OF SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-
19)

RNA tests can confirm the diagnosis of SARS-
CoV-2 (COVID-19) cases with real-time RT-PCR or
next-generation sequencing (148, 149, 245, 246). At
present, nucleic acid detection techniques, like RT-
PCR, are considered an effective method for
confirming the diagnosis in clinical cases of COVID-
19 (148). Several companies across the world are
currently focusing on developing and marketing
SARS-CoV-2-specific nucleic acid detection kits.
Multiple laboratories are also developing their own
in-house RT-PCR. One of them is the SARS-CoV-2
nucleic acid detection kit produced by Shuoshi
Biotechnology (double fluorescence PCR method)
(150). Up to 30 March 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) had granted 22 in vitro
diagnostics Emergency Use Authorizations (EUAs),
including for the RT-PCR diagnostic panel for the
universal detection of SARS-like betacoronaviruses
and specific detection of SARS-CoV-2, developed
by the U.S. CDC (Table 1) (258, 259).
SARAS-CoV-2. strains available in the National
Center for Biotechnology Information and GISAID
databases were subjected to multiple-sequence
alignment and phylogenetic analyses for studying
variations in the viral genome (260). All the viral
strains revealed high homology of 99.99% (99.91%
to 100%) at the nucleotide level and 99.99%
(99.79% to 100%) at the amino acid level. Overall
variation was found to be low in ORF regions, with
13 variation sites recognized in la, 1b, S, 3a, M, 8,
and N regions. Mutation rates of 30.53% (29/95) and
29.47% (28/95) were observed at nt 28144 (ORF8)
and nt 8782 (ORF 1a) positions, respectively. Owing
to such selective mutations, a few specific regions of
SARS-CoV-2 should not be considered for designing
primers and probes. The SARS-CoV-2 reference
sequence could pave the way to study molecular
biology and pathobiology, along with developing
diagnostics and appropriate prevention and control
strategies for countering SARS-CoV-2 (260).
Nucleic acids of SARS-CoV-2 can be detected
from samples (64) such as bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid, sputum, nasal swabs, fiber bronchoscope brush
biopsy specimen, pharyngeal swabs, feces, blood,
and urine, with different levels of diagnostic
performance (Table 2) (80, 245, 246). The viral loads
of SARS-CoV-2 were measured using N-gene-
specific quantitative RT-PCR in throat swab and
sputum samples collected from COVID-19-infected
individuals. The results indicated that the viral load
peaked at around 5 to 6 days following the onset of
symptoms, and it ranged from 10* to 107 copies/ml
during this time (151). In another study, the viral
load was found to be higher in the nasal swabs than
the throat swabs obtained from COVID-19
symptomatic patients (82). Although initially it was
thought that viral load would be associated with poor
outcomes, some case reports have shown
asymptomatic individuals with high viral loads
(247). Recently, the viral load in nasal and throat
swabs of 17 symptomatic patients was determined,
and higher viral loads were recorded soon after the
onset of symptoms, particularly in the nose
compared to the throat. The pattern of viral nucleic
acid shedding of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients was
similar to that of influenza patients but seemed to be
different from that of SARS-CoV patients. The viral
load detected in asymptomatic patients resembled
that of symptomatic patients as studied in China,
which reflects the transmission perspective of
asymptomatic or symptomatic patients having
minimum signs and symptoms (82). Another study,
Bas YUP ly atl UL Sy Up ryiliatle Paelielils did Vilis
minimum signs and symptoms (82). Another study,
conducted in South Korea, related to SARS-CoV-2
viral load, opined that SARS-CoV-2 kinetics were
significantly different from those of earlier reported
CoV infections, including SARS-CoV (253). SARS-
CoV-2 transmission can occur early in the viral
infection phase; thus, diagnosing cases and isolation
attempts for this virus warrant different strategies
than those needed to counter SARS-CoV. Studies are
required to establish any correlation between SARS-
CoV-2 viral load and cultivable virus. Recognizing
patients with fewer or no symptoms, along with
having modest detectable viral RNA in_ the
oropharynx for 5 days, indicates the requirement of
data for assessing SARS-CoV-2 transmission
dynamics and updating the screening procedures in
the clinics (82).
The results of the studies related to SARS-CoV-2
viral loads reflect active replication of this virus in
the upper respiratory tract and prolonged viral
shedding after symptoms disappear, including via
stool. Thus, the current case definition needs to be
updated along with a reassessment of the strategies
to be adopted for restraining the SARS-CoV-2
outbreak spread (248). In some cases, the viral load
studies of SARS-CoV-2 have also been useful to
recommend precautionary measures when handling
specific samples, e.g., feces. In a recent survey from
17 confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection with
available data (representing days 0 to 13 after onset),
stool samples from nine cases (53%; days 0 to 11
after onset) were positive on RT-PCR analysis.
Although the viral loads were lower than those of
respiratory samples (range, 550 copies per ml to
1.21 x 10° copies per ml), this has essential biosafety
implications (151).

The samples from 18 SARS-CoV-2-positive
patients in Singapore who had traveled from Wuhan
to Singapore showed the presence of viral RNA in
stool and whole blood but not in urine by real-time
RT-PCR (288). Further, novel SARS-CoV-2
infections have been detected in a variety of clinical
specimens, like bronchoalveolar lavage fluid,
sputum, nasal swabs, fibrobronchoscope brush
biopsy specimens, pharyngeal swabs, feces, and
blood (246).

The presence of SARS-CoV-2 in fecal samples
has posed grave public health concerns. In addition
to the direct transmission mainly occurring via
droplets of sneezing and coughing, other routes, such
as fecal excretion and environmental and fomite
contamination, are contributing to SARS-CoV-2
transmission and spread (249-252). Fecal excretion
has also been documented for SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV, along with the potential to stay viable
in situations aiding fecal-oral transmission. Thus,
SARS-CoV-2 has every possibility to be transmitted
through this mode. Fecal-oral transmission of SARS-
CoV-2, particularly in regions having low standards
of hygiene and poor sanitation, may have grave
consequences with regard to the high spread of this
virus. Ethanol and disinfectants containing chlorine
or bleach are effective against coronaviruses
(249-252). Appropriate precautions need to be
followed strictly while handling the stools of patients
infected with SARS-CoV-2. Biowaste materials and
sewage from hospitals must be adequately
disinfected, treated, and disposed of properly. The
significance of frequent and good hand hygiene and
sanitation practices needs to be given due emphasis
(249-252). Future explorative research needs to be
conducted with regard to the fecal-oral transmission
of SARS-CoV-2, along with focusing on
environmental investigations to find out if this virus
could stay viable in situations and atmospheres
facilitating such potent routes of transmission. The
correlation of fecal concentrations of viral RNA with
disease severity needs to be determined, along with
assessing the gastrointestinal symptoms and the
possibility of fecal SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection
during the COVID-19 incubation period or
convalescence phases of the disease (249-252).

The lower respiratory tract sampling techniques,
like bronchoalveolar lavage fluid aspirate, are
considered the ideal clinical materials, rather than
the throat swab, due to their higher positive rate on
the nucleic acid test (148). The diagnosis of COVID-
19 can be made by using upper-respiratory-tract
specimens collected using nasopharyngeal and
oropharyngeal swabs. However, these techniques are
associated with unnecessary risks to health care
workers due to close contact with patients (152).
Similarly, a single patient with a high viral load was
reported to contaminate an entire endoscopy room by
shedding the virus, which may remain viable for at
least 3 days and is considered a great risk for
uninfected patients and health care workers (289).
Recently, it was found that the anal swabs gave more
positive results than oral swabs in the later stages of
infection (153). Hence, clinicians have to be cautious
while discharging any COVID-19-infected patient
based on negative oral swab test results due to the
possibility of fecal-oral transmission. Even though
the viral loads in stool samples were found to be less
than those of respiratory samples, _ strict
precautionary measures have to be followed while
handling stool samples of COVID-19 suspected or
infected patients (151). Children infected with
SARS-CoV-2 experience only a mild form of illness
and recover immediately after treatment. It was
recently found that stool samples of SARS-CoV-2-
infected children that gave negative throat swab
results were positive within ten days of negative
results. This could result in the  fecal-oral
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infections, especially
in children (290). Hence, to prevent the fecal-oral
transmission of SARS-CoV-2, infected COVID-19
patients should only be considered negative when
they test negative for SARS-CoV-2 in the stool
sample.
to be confirmed if the respiratory tract aspirate or
blood samples test positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid using RT-PCR or by the identification of SARS-
CoV-2 genetic sequence in respiratory tract aspirate
or blood samples (80). The patient will be confirmed
as cured when two subsequent oral swab results are
negative (153). Recently, the live virus was detected
in the self-collected saliva of patients infected with
COVID-19. These findings were confirmative of
using saliva as a noninvasive specimen for the
diagnosis of COVID-19 infection in suspected
individuals (152). It has also been observed that the
initial screening of COVID-19 patients infected with
RT-PCR may give negative results even if they have
chest CT findings that are suggestive of infection.
Hence, for the accurate diagnosis of COVID-19, a
combination of repeated swab tests using RT-PCR
and CT scanning is required to prevent the
possibility of false-negative results during disease
screening (154). RT-PCR is the most widely used test
for diagnosing COVID-19. However, it has some
significant limitations from the clinical perspective,
since it will not give any clarity regarding disease
progression. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) can be
used for the quantification of viral load in the

samples obtained from lower respiratory tracts.
Hence, based on the viral load, we can quickly
evaluate the progression of infection (291). In
addition to all of the above findings, sequencing and
phylogenetics are critical in the correct identification
and confirmation of the causative viral agent and
useful to establish relationships with previous
isolates and sequences, as well as to know, especially
during an epidemic, the nucleotide and amino acid
mutations and the molecular divergence. The rapid
development and implementation of diagnostic tests
against emerging novel diseases like COVID-19
pose significant challenges due to the lack of
resources and logistical limitations associated with
an outbreak (155).

SARS-CoV-2 infection can also be confirmed by
isolation and culturing. The human airway epithelial
cell culture was found to be useful in isolating
SARS-CoV-2 (3). The efficient control of an
outbreak depends on the rapid diagnosis of the
disease. Recently, in response to the COVID-19
outbreak, 1-step quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-PCR assays were developed that detect
the ORF1b and N regions of the SARS-CoV-2
genome (156). That assay was found to achieve the
rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nucleic acid-based
assays offer high accuracy in the diagnosis of SARS-
CoV-2, but the current rate of spread limits its use
due to the lack of diagnostic assay kits. This will
further result in the extensive transmission of
COVID-19, since only a portion of suspected cases
can be diagnosed. In such situations, conventional
serological assays, like enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), that are specific to
COVID-19 IgM and IgG antibodies can be used as a
high-throughput alternative (149). At present, there
is no diagnostic kit available for detecting the SARS-
CoV-2 antibody (150). The specific antibody profiles
of COVID-19 patients were analyzed, and it was
found that the IgM level lasted more than 1 month,
indicating a prolonged stage of virus replication in
SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. The IgG levels were
found to increase only in the later stages of the
disease. These findings indicate that the specific
antibody profiles of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV
were similar (325). These findings can be utilized for
the development of specific diagnostic tests against
COVID-19 and can be used for rapid screening.
Even though diagnostic test kits are already available
that can detect the genetic sequences of SARS-CoV-
2 (95), their availability is a concern, as the number
of COVID-19 cases is skyrocketing (155, 157). A
major problem associated with this diagnostic kit is
that it works only when the test subject has an active
infection, limiting its use to the earlier stages of
infection. Several laboratories around the world are
currently developing antibody-based diagnostic tests
against SARS-CoV-2 (157).

Chest CT is an ideal diagnostic tool for
identifying viral pneumonia. The sensitivity of chest
CT is far superior to that of X-ray screening. The
chest CT findings associated with COVID-19-
infected patients include characteristic patchy
infiltration that later progresses to ground-glass
opacities (158). Early manifestations of COVID-19
pneumonia might not be evident in X-ray chest
radiography. In such situations, a chest CT
examination can be performed, as it is considered
highly specific for COVID-19 pneumonia (118).
Those patients having COVID-19 pneumonia will
exhibit the typical ground-glass opacity in their chest
CT images (154). The patients infected with
COVID-19 had elevated plasma angiotensin 2 levels.
The level of angiotensin 2 was found to be linearly
associated with viral load and lung injury, indicating
its potential as a diagnostic biomarker (121). The
chest CT imaging abnormalities associated with
COVID-19 pneumonia have also been observed even
in asymptomatic patients. These abnormalities
progress from the initial focal unilateral to diffuse
bilateral ground-glass opacities and will further
progress to or coexist with lung consolidation
changes within 1 to 3 weeks (159). The role played
by radiologists in the current scenario is very
important. Radiologists can help in the early
diagnosis of lung abnormalities associated with
COVID-19 pneumonia. They can also help in the
evaluation of disease severity, identifying its
progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome
and the presence of secondary bacterial infections
(160). Even though chest CT is considered an
essential diagnostic tool for COVID-19, the
extensive use of CT for screening purposes in the
suspected individuals might be associated with a
disproportionate risk-benefit ratio due to increased
radiation exposure as well as increased risk of cross-
infection. Hence, the use of CT for early diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2 infection in high-risk groups should be
done with great caution (292).

More recently, other advanced diagnostics have
been designed and developed for the detection of
SARS-CoV-2 (345, 347, 350-352). A reverse
transcriptional loop-mediated isothermal
amplification (RT-LAMP), namely, iLACO, has been
developed for rapid and colorimetric detection of this
virus (354). RT-LAMP serves as a simple, rapid, and
sensitive diagnostic method that does not require
sophisticated equipment or skilled personnel (349).
An interactive web-based dashboard for tracking
SARS-CoV-2 in a real-time mode has been designed
(238). A smartphone-integrated home-based point-
of-care testing (POCT) tool, a paper-based POCT
combined with LAMP, is a useful point-of-care
diagnostic (353). An Abbott ID Now COVID-19
molecular POCT-based test, using isothermal nucleic
acid amplification technology, has been designed as
a point-of-care test for very rapid detection of
SARS-CoV-2 in just 5 min (344). A CRISPR-based
SHERLOCK (specific high-sensitivity enzymatic
reporter unlocking) diagnostic for rapid detection of
SARS-CoV-2 without the requirement of specialized
instrumentation has been reported to be very useful
in the clinical diagnosis of COVID-19 (360). A
CRISPR-Cas12-based lateral flow assay also has
been developed for rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2
(346). Artificial intelligence, by means of a three-
dimensional deep-learning model, has _ been
developed for sensitive and specific diagnosis of
COVID-19 via CT images (332).

Tracking and mapping of the rising incidence
rates, disease outbreaks, community _ spread,
clustered transmission events, hot spots, and
superspreader potential of SARS-CoV-2/COVID
warrant full exploitation of real-time disease
mapping by employing geographical information
systems (GIS), such as the GIS software Kosmo 3.1,
web-based real-time tools and dashboards, apps, and
advances in information technology (356-359).
Researchers have also developed a few prediction
tools/models, such as the prediction model risk of
bias assessment tool (PROBAST) and critical
appraisal and data extraction for systematic reviews
of prediction modeling studies (CHARMS), which
could aid in assessing the possibility of getting
infection and estimating the prognosis in patients;
however, such models may suffer from bias issues
and, hence, cannot be considered completely
trustworthy, which necessitates the development of
new and reliable predictors (360).

VACCINES, THERAPEUTICS, AND
DRUGS

Recently emerged viruses, such as Zika, Ebola,
and Nipah viruses, and their grave threats to humans
have begun a race in exploring the designing and
developing of advanced vaccines, prophylactics,
therapeutics, and drug regimens to counter emerging
viruses (161-163, 280). Several attempts are being
made to design and develop vaccines for CoV
infection, mostly by targeting the spike glycoprotein.
Nevertheless, owing to extensive diversity in
antigenic variants, cross-protection rendered by the
vaccines is significantly limited, even within the
strains of a phylogenetic subcluster (104). Due to the
lack of effective antiviral therapy and vaccines in the
present scenario, we need to depend solely on
implementing effective infection control measures to
lessen the risk of possible nosocomial transmission
(68). Recently, the receptor for SARS-CoV-2 was
established as the human angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (hACE2), and the virus was found to enter
the host cell mainly through endocytosis. It was also
found that the major components that have a critical
role in viral entry include PIKfyve, TPC2, and
cathepsin L. These findings are critical, since the
components described above might act as candidates
for vaccines or therapeutic drugs against SARS-
CoV-2 (293).

The majority of the treatment options and
strategies that are being evaluated for SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19) have been taken from our previous
experiences in treating SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and
other emerging viral diseases. Several therapeutic
and preventive strategies, including vaccines,
immunotherapeutics, and antiviral drugs, have been
exploited against the previous CoV _ outbreaks
(SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV) (8, 104, 164-167).
These valuable options have already been evaluated
for their potency, efficacy, and safety, along with
several other types of current research that will fuel
our search for ideal therapeutic agents against
COVID-19 (7, 9, 19, 21, 36). The primary cause of
the unavailability of approved and commercial
vaccines, drugs, and therapeutics to counter the
earlier SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV seems to owe to
the lesser attention of the biomedicine and
pharmaceutical companies, as these two CoVs did
not cause much havoc, global threat, and panic like
those posed by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic (19).
Moreover, for such outbreak situations, the
requirement for vaccines and_ therapeutics/drugs
exists only for a limited period, until the outbreak is
controlled. The proportion of the human population
infected with SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV was also
much lower across the globe, failing to attract drug
and vaccine manufacturers and producers. Therefore,
by the time an effective drug or vaccine is designed
against such disease outbreaks, the virus would have
been controlled by adopting appropriate and strict
prevention and control measures, and patients for
clinical trials will not be available. The newly
developed drugs cannot be marketed due to the lack
of end users.

Vaccines

The S protein plays a significant role in the
induction of protective immunity against SARS-CoV
by mediating T-cell responses and neutralizing
antibody production (168). In the past few decades,
we have seen several attempts to develop a vaccine
against human coronaviruses by using S protein as
the target (168, 169). However, the developed
vaccines have minimal application, even among
closely related strains of the virus, due to a lack of
cross-protection. That is mainly because of the
extensive diversity existing among the different
antigenic variants of the virus (104). The
contributions of the structural proteins, like spike
(S), matrix (M), small envelope (E), and
nucleocapsid (N) proteins, of SARS-CoV to induce
protective immunity has been evaluated by
expressing them in a recombinant parainfluenza
virus type 3 vector (BHPIV3). Of note, the result
was conclusive that the expression of M, E, or N
proteins without the presence of S protein would not

confer any noticeable protection, with the absence of
detectable serum SARS-CoV-neutralizing antibodies
(170). Antigenic determinant sites present over S and
N_ structural proteins of SARS-CoV-2 can be
explored as suitable vaccine candidates (294). In the
Asian population, S, E, M, and N proteins of SARS-
CoV-2 are being targeted for developing subunit
vaccines against COVID-19 (295).

The identification of the immunodominant region
among the subunits and domains of S protein is
critical for developing an effective vaccine against
the coronavirus. The C-terminal domain of the S1
subunit is considered the immunodominant region of
the porcine deltacoronavirus S_ protein (171).
Similarly, further investigations are needed to
determine the immunodominant regions of SARS-
CoV-2 for facilitating vaccine development.

However, our previous attempts to develop a
universal vaccine that is effective for both SARS-
CoV and MERS-CoV based on T-cell epitope
similarity pointed out the possibility of cross-
reactivity among coronaviruses (172). That can be
made possible by selected potential vaccine targets
that are common to both viruses. SARS-CoV-2 has
been reported to be closely related to SARS-CoV
(173, 174). Hence, knowledge and understanding of
S protein-based vaccine development in SARS-CoV
will help to identify potential S protein vaccine
candidates in SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, vaccine
strategies based on the whole S protein, S protein
subunits, or specific potential epitopes of S protein
appear to be the most promising vaccine candidates
against coronaviruses. The RBD of the S1 subunit of
S protein has a superior capacity to induce
neutralizing antibodies. This property of the RBD
can be utilized for designing potential SARS-CoV
vaccines either by using RBD-containing
recombinant proteins or recombinant vectors that
encode RBD (175). Hence, the superior genetic
similarity existing between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-
CoV can be utilized to repurpose vaccines that have
proven in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV to be
utilized for SARS-CoV-2. The possibility of cross-
protection in COVID-19 was evaluated by
comparing the S protein sequences of SARS-CoV-2
with that of SARS-CoV. The comparative analysis
confirmed that the variable residues were found
concentrated on the S1 subunit of S protein, an
important vaccine target of the virus (150). Hence,
the possibility of SARS-CoV-specific neutralizing
antibodies providing cross-protection to COVID-19
might be lower. Further genetic analysis is required
between SARS-CoV-2 and different strains of
SARS-CoV and SARS-like (SL) CoVs to evaluate
the possibility of repurposed vaccines against
COVID-19. This strategy will be helpful in the
scenario of an outbreak, since much time can be
saved, because preliminary evaluation, including in
vitro studies, already would be completed for such
vaccine candidates.

Multiepitope subunit vaccines can be considered
a promising preventive strategy against the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. Jn silico and advanced
immunoinformatic tools can be used to develop
multiepitope subunit vaccines. The vaccines that are
engineered by this technique can be further evaluated
using docking studies and, if found effective, then
can be further evaluated in animal models (365).
Identifying epitopes that have the potential to
become a vaccine candidate is critical to developing
an effective vaccine against COVID-19. The
immunoinformatics approach has been used for
recognizing essential epitopes of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes and B_ cells from the surface
glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2. Recently, a few
epitopes have been recognized from the SARS-CoV-
2 surface glycoprotein. The selected epitopes
explored targeting molecular dynamic simulations,
evaluating their interaction with corresponding major
histocompatibility complex class I molecules. They
potentially induce immune responses (176). The
recombinant vaccine can be designed by using rabies
virus (RV) as a viral vector. RV can be made to
express MERS-CoV S1 protein on its surface so that
an immune response is induced against MERS-CoV.
The RV vector-based vaccines against MERS-CoV
can induce faster antibody response as well as higher
degrees of cellular immunity than the Gram-positive
enhancer matrix (GEM) particle vector-based
vaccine. However, the latter can induce a very high
antibody response at lower doses (167). Hence, the
degree of humoral and cellular immune responses
produced by such vaccines depends upon the vector
used.

Dual vaccines have been getting more popular
recently. Among them, the rabies virus-based
vectored vaccine platform is used to develop
vaccines against emerging infectious diseases. The
dual vaccine developed from inactivated rabies virus
particles that express the MERS-CoV S1 domain of
S protein was found to induce immune responses for
both MERS-CoV and rabies virus. The vaccinated
mice were found to be completely protected from
challenge with MERS-CoV (169). The intranasal
vaccine in BALB/c mice was found to induce long-
lasting neutralizing immunity against MERS spike
pseudotyped virus, characterized by the induction of
systemic IgG, secretory IgA, and lung-resident
memory T-cell responses (177). Immunoinformatics
methods have been employed for the genome-wide
screening of potential vaccine targets among the
different immunogens of MERS-CoV (178). The N
protein and the potential B-cell epitopes of MERS-
CoV E_ protein have been’ suggested as
immunoprotective targets inducing both T-cell and
neutralizing antibody responses (178, 179).

The collaborative effort of the researchers of
Rocky Mountain Laboratories and Oxford University
is designing a chimpanzee adenovirus-vectored
vaccine to counter COVID-19 (180). The Coalition
for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) has
initiated three programs to design SARS-CoV-2
vaccines (181). CEPI has a collaborative project with
Inovio for designing a MERS-CoV DNA vaccine
that could potentiate effective immunity. CEPI and
the University of Queensland are designing a
molecular clamp vaccine platform for MERS-CoV
and other pathogens, which could assist in the easier
identification of antigens by the immune system
(181). CEPT has also funded Moderna to develon a
vaccine for COVID-19 in partnership with the
Vaccine Research Center (VRC) of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID),
part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (182).
By employing mRNA vaccine platform technology, a
vaccine candidate expressing SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein is likely to go through clinical testing in the
coming months (180). On 16 March 2020, Jennifer
Haller became the first person outside China to
receive an experimental vaccine, developed by
Moderna, against this pandemic virus. Moderna,
along with China’s CanSino Biologics, became the
first research group to launch small clinical trials of
vaccines against COVID-19. Their study is
evaluating the vaccine’s safety and ability to trigger
immune responses (296).

Scientists from all over the world are trying hard
to develop working vaccines with robust protective
immunity against COVID-19. Vaccine candidates,
like mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, INO-4800
DNA coronavirus vaccine, and adenovirus type 5
vector vaccine candidate (Ad5-nCoV), are a few
examples under phase I clinical trials, while self-
amplifying RNA vaccine, oral recombinant COVID-
19 vaccine, BNT162, plant-based COVID-19
vaccine, and li-Key peptide COVID-19 vaccine are

under preclinical trials (297). Similarly, the WHO,
on its official website, has mentioned a detailed list
of COVID-19 vaccine agents that are under
consideration. Different phases of trials are ongoing
for live attenuated virus vaccines, formaldehyde
alum inactivated vaccine, adenovirus type 5 vector
vaccine, LNP-encapsulated mRNA vaccine, DNA
plasmid vaccine, and S protein, S-trimer, and li-Key
peptide as a subunit protein vaccine, among others
(298). The process of vaccine development usually
takes approximately ten years, in the case of
inactivated or live attenuated vaccines, since it
involves the generation of long-term efficacy data.
However, this was brought down to 5 years during
the Ebola emergency for viral vector vaccines. In the
urgency associated with the COVID-19 outbreaks,
we expect a vaccine by the end of this year (343).
The development of an effective vaccine against
COVID-19 with high speed and precision is the
combined result of advancements in computational
biology, gene synthesis, protein engineering, and the
invention of advanced manufacturing platforms
(342).

The recurring nature of the coronavirus outbreaks
calls for the development of a pan-coronavirus
vaccine that can produce cross-reactive antibodies.

However, the success of such a vaccine relies greatly
on its ability to provide protection not only against
present versions of the virus but also the ones that
are likely to emerge in the future. This can be
achieved by identifying antibodies that can recognize
relatively conserved epitopes that are maintained as
such even after the occurrence of considerable
variations (362). Even though several vaccine
clinical trials are being conducted around the world,
pregnant women have been completely excluded
from these studies. Pregnant women are highly
vulnerable to emerging diseases such as COVID-19
due to alterations in the immune system and other
physiological systems that are associated with
pregnancy. Therefore, in the event of successful
vaccine development, pregnant women will not get
access to the vaccines (361). Hence, it is
recommended that pregnant women be included in
the ongoing vaccine trials, since successful
vaccination in pregnancy will protect the mother,
fetus, and newborn.

The heterologous immune effects induced by
Bacillus Calmette Guérin (BCG) vaccination is a
promising strategy for controlling the COVID-19
pandemic and requires further investigations. BCG is
a widely used vaccine against tuberculosis in high-
strain of Mycobacterium bovis. At present, three new
clinical trials have been registered to evaluate the
protective role of BCG vaccination against SARS-
CoV-2 (363). Recently, a cohort study was conducted
to evaluate the impact of childhood BCG vaccination
in COVID-19 PCR _ positivity rates. However,
childhood BCG vaccination was found to be
associated with a rate of COVID-19-positive test
results similar to that of the nonvaccinated group
(364). Further studies are required to analyze
whether BCG vaccination in childhood can induce
protective effects against COVID-19 in adulthood.
Population genetic studies conducted on 103
genomes identified that the SARS-CoV-2 virus has
evolved into two major types, L and S. Among the
two types, L type is expected to be the most
prevalent (~70%), followed by the S type (~30%)
(366). This finding has a significant impact on our
race to develop an ideal vaccine, since the vaccine
candidate has to target both strains to be considered
effective. At present, the genetic differences between
the L and S types are very small and may not affect
the immune response. However, we can expect
further genetic variations in the coming days that
could lead to the emergence of new strains (367).
There is no currently licensed specific antiviral
treatment for MERS- and SARS-CoV infections, and
the main focus in clinical settings remains on
lessening clinical signs and providing supportive
care (183-186). Effective drugs to manage COVID-
19 patients include remdesivir, lopinavir/ritonavir
alone or in a blend with interferon beta, convalescent
plasma, and monoclonal antibodies (MAbs);
however, efficacy and safety issues of these drugs
require additional clinical trials (187, 281). A
controlled trial of ritonavir-boosted lopinavir and
interferon alpha 2b treatment was performed on
COVID-19 hospitalized patients
(ChiCTR2000029308) (188). In addition, the use of
hydroxychloroquine and _ tocilizumab for their
potential role in modulating inflammatory responses
in the lungs and antiviral effect has been proposed
and discussed in many research articles. Still, no
fool-proof clinical trials have been published (194,
196, 197, 261-272). Recently, a clinical trial
conducted on adult patients suffering from severe
COVID-19 revealed no benefit of lopinavir-ritonavir
treatment over standard care (273).

The efforts to control SARS-CoV-2 infection
utilize defined strategies as followed against MERS
and SARS, along with adopting and strengthening a
few precautionary measures owing to the unknown
nature of this novel virus (36, 189). Presently, the
main course of treatment for severely affected
SARS-CoV-2 patients admitted to hospitals includes
mechanical ventilation, intensive care unit (ICU)
admittance, and symptomatic and _ supportive
therapies. Additionally, RNA synthesis inhibitors
(lamivudine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate),
remdesivir, neuraminidase inhibitors, peptide (EK 1),
anti-inflammatory drugs, abidol, and Chinese
traditional medicine (Lianhuagingwen — and
ShuFengJieDu capsules) could aid in COVID-19
treatment. However, further clinical trials are being
carried out concerning their safety and efficacy (7).
It might require months to a year(s) to design and
develop effective drugs, therapeutics, and vaccines
against COVID-19, with adequate evaluation and
approval from regulatory bodies and moving to the
bulk production of many millions of doses at
commercial levels to meet the timely demand of
mass populations across the globe (9). Continuous
efforts are also warranted to identify and assess
viable drugs and immunotherapeutic regimens that
revealed proven potency in combating other viral
agents similar to SARS-CoV-2.

COVID-19 patients showing severe signs are
treated symptomatically along with oxygen therapy.
In such cases where the patients progress toward
respiratory failure and become refractory to oxygen
therapy, mechanical ventilation is necessitated. The
COVID-19-induced septic shock can be managed by
providing adequate hemodynamic support (299).
Several classes of drugs are currently being
evaluated for their potential therapeutic action
against SARS-CoV-2. Therapeutic agents that have
anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity can be broadly classified
into three categories: drugs that block virus entry
into the host cell, drugs that block viral replication as
well as its survival within the host cell, and drugs
that attenuate the exaggerated host immune response
(300). An inflammatory cytokine storm is commonly
seen in critically ill COVID-19 patients. Hence, they
may benefit from the use of timely anti-inflammation
treatment. Anti-inflammatory therapy using drugs
like glucocorticoids, cytokine inhibitors, JAK
inhibitors, and chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine
should be done only after analyzing the risk/benefit
ratio in COVID-19 patients (301). There have not
been any studies concerning the application of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) to
COVID-19-infected patients. However, reasonable
pieces of evidence are available that link NSAID
uses with the occurrence of respiratory and
cardiovascular adverse effects. Hence, as a
cautionary approach, it is better to recommend the
use of NSAIDs as the first-line option for managing
COVID-19 symptoms (302). The use _ of
corticosteroids in COVID-19 patients is still a matter
of controversy and requires further systematic
clinical studies. The guidelines that were put forward
to manage critically ill adults suggest the use of
systemic corticosteroids in mechanically ventilated
adults with ARDS (303). The generalized use of
corticosteroids is not indicated in COVID-19, since
there are some concerns associated with the use of
corticosteroids in viral pneumonia. Stem cell therapy
using mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is another
hopeful strategy that can be used in clinical cases of
COVID-19 owing to its potential
immunomodulatory capacity. It may have a
beneficial role in attenuating the cytokine storm that
is observed in severe cases of SARS-CoV-2
infection, thereby reducing mortality. Among the
different types of MSCs, expanded umbilical cord
MSCs can be considered a potential therapeutic
agent that requires further validation for managing
critically ill COVID-19 patients (304).

Repurposed broad-spectrum antiviral drugs
naving proven uses against other viral pathogens Can
be employed for SARS-CoV-2-infected patients.
These possess benefits of easy accessibility and
recognized pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
activities, stability, doses, and side effects (9).
Repurposed drugs have been studied for treating
CoV infections, like lopinavir/ritonavir, and
interferon-1B revealed in vitro anti-MERS-CoV
action. The in vivo experiment carried out in the
nonhuman primate model of common marmosets
treated with lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon beta
showed superior protective results in treated animals
than in the untreated ones (190). A combination of
these drugs is being evaluated to treat MERS in
humans (MIRACLE trial) (191). These two protease
inhibitors (lopinavir and ritonavir), in combination
with ribavirin, gave encouraging clinical outcomes in
SARS patients, suggesting their therapeutic values
(165). However, in the current scenario, due to the
lack of specific therapeutic agents against SARS-
CoV-2, hospitalized patients confirmed for the
disease are given supportive care, like oxygen and
fluid therapy, along with antibiotic therapy for
managing secondary bacterial infections (192).
Patients with novel coronavirus or COVID-19
pneumonia who are mechanically ventilated often

; lati ;
relaxation drugs to prevent ventilator-related lung
injury associated with human-machine
incoordination (122). The result obtained from a
clinical study of four patients infected with COVID-
19 claimed that combination therapy using
lopinavir/ritonavir, arbidol, and Shufeng Jiedu
capsules (traditional Chinese medicine) was found to
be effective in managing COVID-19 pneumonia
(193). It is difficult to evaluate the therapeutic
potential of a drug or a combination of drugs for
managing a disease based on such a limited sample
size. Before choosing the ideal therapeutic agent for
the management of COVID-19, randomized clinical
control studies should be performed with a sufficient
study population.

Antiviral Drugs

Several classes of routinely used antiviral drugs,
like oseltamivir (neuraminidase inhibitor), acyclovir,
ganciclovir, and ribavirin, do not have any effect on
COVID-19 and, hence, are not recommended (187).
Oseltamivir, a neuraminidase inhibitor, has been
explored in Chinese hospitals for treating suspected
COVID-19 cases, although proven efficacy against
SARS-CoV-2 is still lacking for this drug (7). The in
vitro antiviral potential of FAD-approved drugs, viz.,
ribavirin, penciclovir, nitazoxanide, nafamostat, and
chloroquine, tested in comparison to remdesivir and
favipiravir (broad-spectrum antiviral drugs) revealed
remdesivir and chloroquine to be highly effective
against SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro (194).
Ribavirin, penciclovir, and favipiravir might not
possess noteworthy in vivo antiviral actions for
SARS-CoV-2, since higher concentrations of these
nucleoside analogs are needed in vitro to lessen the
viral infection. Both remdesivir and chloroquine are
being used in humans to treat other diseases, and
such safer drugs can be explored for assessing their
effectiveness in COVID-19 patients.

Several therapeutic agents, such as
lopinavir/ritonavir, chloroquine, and
hydroxychloroquine, have been proposed for the
clinical management of COVID-19 (299). A
molecular docking study, conducted in the RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of SARS-CoV-2
using different commercially available
antipolymerase drugs, identified that drugs such as
ribavirin, remdesivir, galidesivir, tenofovir, and
sofosbuvir bind RdRp tightly, indicating their vast
potential to be used against COVID-19 (305). A
broad-spectrum antiviral drug that was developed in
the United States, tilorone dihydrochloride (tilorone),
was previously found to possess potent antiviral
activity against MERS, Marburg, Ebola, and
Chikungunya viruses (306). Even though it had
broad-spectrum activity, it was neglected for an
extended period. Tilorone is another antiviral drug
that might have activity against SARS-CoV-2.
Remdesivir, a novel nucleotide analog prodrug,
was developed for treating Ebola virus disease
(EVD), and it was also found to inhibit the
replication of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV in
primary human airway epithelial cell culture systems
(195). Recently, in vitro study has proven that
remdesivir has better antiviral activity than lopinavir
and ritonavir. Further, in vivo studies conducted in
mice also identified that treatment with remdesivir
improved pulmonary function and reduced viral
loads and lung pathology both in prophylactic and
therapeutic regimens compared to
lopinavir/ritonavir-IFN-y treatment in MERS-CoV
infection (8). Remdesivir also inhibits a diverse
range of coronaviruses, including circulating human
CoV, zoonotic bat CoV, and prepandemic zoonotic
CoV (195). Remdesivir is also considered the only
therapeutic drug that significantly reduces
pulmonary pathology (8). All these findings indicate
that remdesivir has to be further evaluated for its
efficacy in the treatment of COVID-19 infection in
humans. The broad-spectrum activity exhibited by
remdesivir will help control the spread of disease in
the event of a new coronavirus outbreak.
Chloroquine is an antimalarial drug known to
possess antiviral activity due to its ability to block
virus-cell fusion by raising the endosomal pH
necessary for fusion. It also interferes with virus-
receptor binding by interfering with the terminal
glycosylation of SARS-CoV cellular receptors, such
as ACE2 (196). In a recent multicenter clinical trial
that was conducted in China, chloroquine phosphate
was found to exhibit both efficacy and safety in the
therapeutic management of SARS-CoV-2-associated
pneumonia (197). This drug is already included in
the treatment guidelines issued by the National
Health Commission of the People’s Republic of
China. The preliminary clinical trials using
hydroxychloroquine, another aminoquinoline drug,
gave promising results. The COVID-19 patients
received 600 mg of hydroxychloroquine daily along
with azithromycin as a single-arm protocol. This
protocol was found to be associated with a
noteworthy reduction in viral load. Finally, it
resulted in a complete cure (271); however, the study
comprised a small population and, hence, the
possibility of misinterpretation could arise. However,
in another case study, the authors raised concerns
over the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine-
azithromycin in the treatment of COVID-19 patients,
since no observable effect was seen when they were
used. In some cases, the treatment was discontinued
due to the prolongation of the QT interval (307).
Hence, further randomized clinical trials are required
before concluding this matter.

Recently, another FDA-approved drug,
ivermectin, was reported to inhibit the in vitro
replication of SARS-CoV-2. The findings from this
study indicate that a single treatment of this drug was
able to induce an ~5,000-fold reduction in the viral
RNA at 48 h in cell culture. (308). One of the main
disadvantages that limit the clinical utility of
ivermectin is its potential to cause cytotoxicity.
However, altering the vehicles used in _ the
formulations, the pharmacokinetic properties can be
modified, thereby having significant control over the
systemic concentration of ivermectin (338). Based
on the pharmacokinetic simulation, it was also found
that ivermectin may have limited therapeutic utility
in managing COVID-19, since the inhibitory
concentration that has to be achieved for effective
anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity is far higher than the
maximum plasma concentration achieved by
administering the approved dose (340). However,
ivermectin, being a host-directed agent, exhibits
antiviral activity by targeting a critical cellular
process of the mammalian cell. Therefore, the
administration of ivermectin, even at lower doses,
will reduce the viral load at a minor level. This slight
decrease will provide a great advantage to the
immune system for mounting a large-scale antiviral
response against SARS-CoV-2 (341). Further, a
combination of ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine
might have a synergistic effect, since ivermectin
reduces viral replication, while hydroxychloroquine
inhibits the entry of the virus in the host cell (339).
Further, in vivo studies and randomized clinical
control trials are required to understand the
mechanism as well as the clinical utility of this
promising drug.

Nafamostat is a potent inhibitor of MERS-CoV
that acts by preventing membrane fusion.
Nevertheless, it does not have any sort of inhibitory
action against SARS-CoV-2 infection (194).
Recently, several newly synthesized halogenated
triazole compounds were evaluated, using
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-
based helicase assays, for their ability to inhibit
Among the evaluated compounds, 4-(cyclopent-
1-en-3-ylamino)-5-[2-(4-
iodophenyl)hydrazinyl]-4H-1,2,4-triazole-3-thiol and
4-(cyclopent- 1-en-3-ylamino)-5-[2-(4-
chlorophenyl)hydrazinyl]-4H-1,2,4-triazole-3-thiol
were found to be the most potent. These compounds
were used for in silico studies, and molecular
docking was accomplished into the active binding
site of MERS-CoV helicase nsp13 (21). Further
studies are required for evaluating the therapeutic
potential of these newly identified compounds in the
management of COVID-19 infection.

Passive Immunization/Antibody Therapy/MAb

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) may be helpful in
the intervention of disease in CoV-exposed
individuals. Patients recovering from SARS showed
robust neutralizing antibodies against this CoV
infection (164). A set of MAbs aimed at the MERS-
CoV S protein-specific domains, comprising six
specific epitope groups interacting with receptor-
binding, membrane fusion, and sialic acid-binding
sites, make up crucial entry tasks of S protein (198,
199). Passive immunization employing weaker and
strongly neutralizing antibodies provided
considerable protection in mice against a MERS-
CoV lethal challenge. Such antibodies may play a
crucial role in enhancing protective humoral
responses against the emerging CoVs by aiming
appropriate epitopes and functions of the S protein.
The cross-neutralization ability of SARS-CoV RBD-
specific neutralizing MAbs considerably relies on
the resemblance between their RBDs; therefore,
SARS-CoV RBD-specific antibodies could cross-
neutralized SL CoVs, 1.e., bat-SL-CoV strain WIV1
(RBD with eight amino acid differences from SARS-
CoV) but not bat-SL-CoV strain SHCO14 (24 amino
acid differences) (200).

Appropriate RBD-specific MAbs can be
recognized by a relative analysis of RBD of SARS-
CoV-2 to that of SARS-CoV, and cross-neutralizing
SARS-CoV RBD-specific MAbs could be explored
for their effectiveness against COVID-19 and further
need to be assessed clinically. The USS.
biotechnology company Regeneron is attempting to
recognize potent and specific MAbs to combat
COVID-19. An ideal therapeutic option suggested
for SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) is the combination
therapy comprised of MAbs and the drug remdesivir
(COVID-19) (201). The SARS-CoV-specific human
MAb CR3022 is found to bind with SARS-CoV-2
RBD, indicating its potential as a therapeutic agent
in the management of COVID-19. It can be used
alone or in combination with other effective
neutralizing antibodies for the treatment and
prevention of COVID-19 (202). Furthermore, SARS-
CoV-specific neutralizing antibodies, like m396 and
CR3014, failed to bind the S protein of SARS-CoV-
2, indicating that a particular level of similarity is
mandatory between the RBDs of SARS-CoV and
SARS-CoV-2 for the cross-reactivity to occur.

Further assessment is necessary before
confirming the effectiveness of such combination
therapy. In addition, to prevent further community
and nosocomial spread of COVID-19, the
postprocedure risk management program should not
be neglected (309). Development of broad-spectrum
inhibitors against the human coronaviral pathogens
will help to facilitate clinical trials on the
effectiveness of such inhibitors against endemic and
emerging coronaviruses (203). A promising animal
study revealed the protective effect of passive
immunotherapy with immune serum from MERS-
immune camels on mice infected with MERS-CoV
(204). Passive immunotherapy using convalescent
plasma is another strategy that can be used for
treating COVID-19-infected, critically ill patients
(205).
(human single-chain antibodies; HuscFvs) or
humanized nanobodies (single-domain antibodies;
sdAb, VH/VHH) could aid in blocking virus
replication, as these agents can traverse the virus-
infected cell membranes (transbodies) and can
interfere with the biological characteristics of the
replicating virus proteins. Such examples include
transbodies to the influenza virus, hepatitis C virus,
Ebola virus, and dengue virus (206). Producing
similar transbodies against intracellular proteins of
coronaviruses, such as papain-like proteases (PLpro),
cysteine-like protease (3CLpro), or other nsps, which
are essential for replication and transcription of the
virus, might formulate a practical move forward for a
safer and potent passive immunization approach for
virus-exposed persons and rendering therapy to
infected patients.

In a case study on five grimly sick patients
having symptoms of severe pneumonia due to
COVID-19, convalescent plasma administration was
found to be helpful in patients recovering
successfully. The convalescent plasma containing a
SARS-CoV-2-specific ELISA (serum) antibody titer
higher than 1:1,000 and neutralizing antibody titer
more significant than 40 was collected from the
recovered patients and used for plasma transfusion
twice in a volume of 200 to 250 ml on the day of
collection (310). At present, treatment for sepsis and
ARDS mainly involves antimicrobial therapy, source
control, and supportive care. Hence, the use of
therapeutic plasma exchange can be considered an
option in managing such severe conditions. Further
randomized trials can be designed to investigate its
efficacy (311).

Potential Therapeutic Agents

Potent therapeutics to combat SARS-CoV-2
infection include virus binding molecules, molecules
or inhibitors targeting particular enzymes implicated
in replication and transcription process of the virus,
helicase inhibitors, vital viral proteases and proteins,
protease inhibitors of host cells, endocytosis
inhibitors, short interfering RNA _ (siRNA),
neutralizing antibodies, MAbs against the host
receptor, MAbs interfering with the Sl RBD,
antiviral peptide aimed at S2, and _ natural
drugs/medicines (7, 166, 186). The S protein acts as
the critical target for developing CoV antivirals, like
inhibitors of S protein and S cleavage, neutralizing
antibodies, RBD-ACE2 blockers, siRNAs, blockers
of the fusion core, and proteases (168).

All of these therapeutic approaches have revealed
both in vitro and in vivo anti-CoV potential.
Although in vitro research carried out with these
therapeutics showed efficacy, most need appropriate
support from randomized animal or human trials.
Therefore, they might be of limited applicability and
require trials against SARS-CoV-2 to gain practical
usefulness. The binding of SARS-CoV-2 with ACE2
leads to the exacerbation of pneumonia as a
consequence of the imbalance in the  renin-
angiotensin system (RAS). The virus-induced
pulmonary inflammatory responses may be reduced
by the administration of ACE inhibitors (ACEI) and
angiotensin type-1 receptor (AT1R) (207).

Several investigations have suggested the use of
small-molecule inhibitors for the potential control of
SARS-CoV infections. Drugs of the FDA-approved
compound library were screened to identify four
small-molecule inhibitors of | MERS-CoV
(chlorpromazine, chloroquine, loperamide, and
lopinavir) that inhibited viral replication. These
compounds also hinder SARS-CoV and human
CoVs (208). Therapeutic strategies involving the use
of specific antibodies or compounds that neutralize
cytokines and their receptors will help to restrain the
host inflammatory responses. Such drugs acting
specifically in the respiratory tract will help to
reduce virus-triggered immune pathologies in
COVID-19 (209). The later stages of coronavirus-
induced inflammatory cascades are characterized by
the release of proinflammatory interleukin-1 (IL-1)
family members, such as IL-1 and IL-33. Hence,
there exists a possibility that the inflammation
associated with coronavirus can be inhibited by
utilizing anti-inflammatory cytokines that belong to
the IL-1 family (92). It has also been suggested that
the actin protein is the host factor that is involved in
cell entry and pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. Hence,
those drugs that modulate the biological activity of
this protein, like ibuprofen, might have some
therapeutic application in managing the disease
(174). The plasma angiotensin 2 level was found to
be markedly elevated in COVID-19 infection and
was correlated with viral load and lung injury.
Hence, drugs that block angiotensin receptors may
have potential for treating COVID-19 infection
(121). A scientist from Germany, named Rolf
Hilgenfeld, has been working on the identification of
drugs for the treatment of coronaviral infection since
the time of the first SARS outbreak (19).

The SARS-CoV S2 subunit has a significant
function in mediating virus fusion that provides entry
into the host cell. Heptad repeat 1 (HR1) and heptad
repeat 2 (HR2) can interact and form a six-helix
bundle that brings the viral and cellular membranes
in close proximity, facilitating its fusion. The
sequence alignment study conducted between
COVID-19 and SARS-CoV identified that the S2
subunits are highly conserved in these CoVs. The
HR1 and HR2 domains showed 92.6% and 100%
overall identity, respectively (210). From these
findings, we can confirm the significance of
COVID-19 HR1 and HR2 and their vital role in host
cell entry. Hence, fusion inhibitors target the HR1
domain of S protein, thereby preventing viral fusion
and entry into the host cell. This is another potential
therapeutic strategy that can be used in the
management of COVID-19. Other than the specific
therapy directed against COVID-19, general
treatments play a vital role in the enhancement of
host immune responses against the viral agent.
Inadequate nutrition is linked to the weakening of
the host immune response, making the individual
more susceptible. The role played by nutrition in
disease susceptibility should be measured by
evaluating the nutritional status of patients with
COVID-19 (205).
LMA AVIV ID ALI Well WULLULLYED

For evaluating the potential of vaccines and
therapeutics against CoVs, including SARS-CoV,
MERS-CoVs, and the presently emerging SARS-
CoV-2, suitable animal models that can mimic the
clinical disease are needed (211, 212). Various
animal models were assessed for SARS- and MERS-
CoVs, such as mice, guinea pigs, golden Syrian
hamsters, ferrets, rabbits, nonhuman primates like
rhesus macaques and marmosets, and cats (185,
213-218). The specificity of the virus to hACE2
(receptor of SARS-CoV) was found to be a
significant barrier in developing animal models.
Consequently, a SARS-CoV transgenic mouse model
has been developed by inserting the hACE2 gene
into the mouse genome (219). The inability of
MERS-CoV to replicate in the respiratory tracts of
animals (mice, hamsters, and ferrets) is another
limiting factor. However, with genetic engineering, a
288-330'/* MERS-CoV genetically modified mouse
model was developed and now is in use for the
assessment of novel drugs and vaccines against
MERS-CoV (220). In the past, small animals (mice
or hamsters) have been targeted for being closer to a
humanized structure, such as mouse DPP4 altered
with human DPP4 (hDPP4), hDPP4-transduced
mice. and hDPP4-Teg mice (transgenic for expressing

hDPP4) for MERS-CoV infection (221). The
CRISPR-Cas9 gene-editing tool has been used for
inserting genomic alterations in mice, making them
susceptible to MERS-CoV infection (222). Efforts
are under way to recognize suitable animal models
for SARS-CoV2/COVID-19, identify the receptor
affinity of this virus, study pathology in experimental
animal models, and explore virus-specific immune
responses and protection studies, which together
would increase the pace of efforts being made for
developing potent vaccines and drugs to counter this
emerging virus. Cell lines, such as monkey epithelial
cell lines (LLC-MK2 and Vero-B4), goat lung cells,
alpaca kidney cells, dromedary umbilical cord cells,
and advanced ex _ vivo _ three-dimensional
tracheobronchial tissue, have been explored to study
human CoVs (MERS-CoV) (223, 224). Vero and
Huh-7 cells (human liver cancer cells) have been
used for isolating SARS-CoV-2 (194).

Recently, an experimental study with rhesus
monkeys as animal models revealed the absence of
any viral loads in nasopharyngeal and anal swabs,
and no viral replication was recorded in the primary
tissues at a time interval of 5 days post-reinfection in
reexposed monkeys (274). The subsequent
virological, radiological, and _ pathological
observations indicated that the monkeys with
reexposure had no recurrence of COVID-19, like the
SARS-CoV-2-infected monkeys without rechallenge.
These findings suggest that primary infection with
SARS-CoV-2 could protect from later exposures to
the virus, which could help in defining disease
prognosis and crucial inferences for designing and
developing potent vaccines against COVID-19
(274).

PREVENTION, CONTROL, AND

MANAGEMENT

In contrast to their response to the 2002 SARS
outbreak, China has shown immense political
openness in reporting the COVID-19 outbreak
promptly. They have also performed rapid
sequencing of COVID-19 at multiple levels and
shared the findings globally within days of
identifying the novel virus (225). The move made by
China opened a new chapter in global health security
and diplomacy. Even though complete lockdown was
declared following the COVID-19 outbreak in
Wuhan, the large-scale movement of people has
resulted in a radiating spread of infections in the
surrounding provinces as well as to several other
countries. Large-scale screening programs might
help us to control the spread of this virus. However,
this is both challenging as well as time-consuming
due to the present extent of infection (226). The
current scenario demands effective implementation
of vigorous prevention and control strategies owing
to the prospect of COVID-19 for nosocomial
infections (68). Follow-ups of infected patients by
telephone on day 7 and day 14 are advised to avoid
any further unintentional spread or nosocomial
transmission (312). The availability of public data
sets provided by independent analytical teams will
act as robust evidence that would guide us in
designing interventions against the COVID-19
outbreak. Newspaper reports and social media can be
used to analyze and reconstruct the progression of an
outbreak. They can help us to obtain detailed patient-
level data in the early stages of an outbreak (227).
Immediate travel restrictions imposed by several
countries might have contributed significantly to
preventing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 globally (89,
228). Following the outbreak, a temporary ban was
imposed on the wildlife trade, keeping in mind the
possible role played by wild animal species in the
origin of SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 (147). Making a
permanent and bold decision on the trade of wild
animal species is necessary to prevent the possibility
of virus spread and initiation of an outbreak due to
zoonotic spillover (1).

Personal protective equipment (PPE), like face
masks, will help to prevent the spread of respiratory
infections like COVID-19. Face masks not only
protect from infectious aerosols but also prevent the
transmission of disease to other susceptible
individuals while traveling through public transport
systems (313). Another critical practice that can
reduce the transmission of respiratory diseases is the
maintenance of hand hygiene. However, the efficacy
of this practice in reducing the transmission of
respiratory viruses like SARS-CoV-2 is much
dependent upon the size of droplets produced. Hand
hygiene will reduce disease transmission only if the
virus is transmitted through the formation of large
droplets (314). Hence, it is better not to
overemphasize that hand hygiene will prevent the
transmission of SARS-CoV-2, since it may produce a
false sense of safety among the general public that
further contributes to the spread of COVID-19. Even
though airborne spread has not been reported in
SARS-CoV-2 infection, transmission can occur
through droplets and fomites, especially when there
is close, unprotected contact between infected and
susceptible individuals. Hence, hand hygiene is
equally as important as the use of appropriate PPE,
like face masks, to break the transmission cycle of
the virus; both hand hygiene and face masks help to
lessen the risk of COVID-19 transmission (315).

Medical staff are in the group of individuals most
at risk of getting COVID-19 infection. This is
because they are exposed directly to infected
patients. Hence, proper training must be given to all
hospital staff on methods of prevention and
protection so that they become competent enough to
protect themselves and others from this deadly
disease (316). As a preventive measure, health care
workers caring for infected patients should take
extreme precautions against both contact and
airborne transmission. They should use PPE such as
face masks (N95 or FFP3), eye protection (goggles),
gowns, and gloves to nullify the risk of infection
(299).

The human-to-human transmission reported in
SARS-CoV-2 infection occurs mainly through
droplet or direct contact. Due to this finding,
frontline health care workers should follow stringent
infection control and preventive measures, such as
the use of PPE, to prevent infection (110). The
mental health of the medical/health workers who are
involved in the COVID-19 outbreak is of great
importance, because the strain on their mental well-
being will affect their attention, concentration, and
decision-making capacity. Hence, for control of the
COVID-19 outbreak, rapid steps should be taken to
protect the mental health of medical workers (229).
Since the living mammals sold in the wet market
are suspected to be the intermediate host of SARS-
CoV-2, there is a need for strengthening the
regulatory mechanism for wild animal trade (13).
The total number of COVID-19 confirmed cases is
on a continuous rise and the cure rate is relatively
low, making disease control very difficult to achieve.
The Chinese government is making continuous
efforts to contain the disease by taking emergency
control and prevention measures. They have already
built a hospital for patients affected by this virus and
are currently building several more for
accommodating the continuously increasing infected
population (230). The effective control of SARS-
CoV-2/COVID-19 requires high-level interventions
like intensive contact tracing, as well as_ the
quarantine of people with suspected infection and the
isolation of infected individuals. The implementation
of rigorous control and preventive measures together
might control the Rg number and reduce the
transmission risk (228). Considering the zoonotic
links associated with SARS-CoV-2, the One Health
approach may play a vital role in the prevention and
control measures being followed to restrain this
pandemic virus (317-319). The © substantial
importation of COVID-19 presymptomatic cases
from Wuhan has resulted in independent, self-
sustaining outbreaks across major cities both within
the country and across the globe. The majority of
Chinese cities are now facing localized outbreaks of
COVID-19 (231). Hence, deploying efficient public
health interventions might help to cut the spread of
this virus globally.

The occurrence of COVID-19 infection on
several cruise ships gave us a preliminary idea
regarding the transmission pattern of the disease.
Cruise ships act as a closed environment and provide
an ideal setting for the occurrence of respiratory
disease outbreaks. Such a situation poses a
significant threat to travelers, since people from
different countries are on board, which favors the
introduction of the pathogen (320). Although nearly
30 cruise ships from different countries have been
found harboring COVID-19 infection, the major
cruise ships that were involved in the COVID-19
outbreaks are the Diamond Princess, Grand
Princess, Celebrity Apex, and Ruby Princess. The
number of confirmed COVID-19 cases around the
world is on the rise. The success of preventive
measures put forward by every country is mainly
dependent upon their ability to anticipate the
approaching waves of patients. This will help to
properly prepare the health care workers and
increase the intensive care unit (ICU) capacity (321).
Instead of entirely relying on lockdown protocols,
countries should focus mainly on _ alternative
intervention strategies, such as large-scale testing,
contract tracing, and localized quarantine of
suspected cases for limiting the spread of this
pandemic virus. Such intervention strategies will be
useful either at the beginning of the pandemic or
after lockdown relaxation (322). Lockdown should
be imposed only to slow down disease progression
among the population so that the health care system
is not overloaded.

The reproduction number (Ro) of COVID-19
infection was earlier estimated to be in the range of
1.4 to 2.5 (70); recently, it was estimated to be 2.24
to 3.58 (76). Compared to its coronavirus
predecessors, COVID-19 has an Rg value that is
greater than that of MERS (Ro < 1) (108) but less
than that of SARS (Ro value of 2 to 5) (93). Still, to
prevent further spread of disease at mass gatherings,
functions remain canceled in the affected cities, and
persons are asked to work from home (232). Hence,
it is a relief that the current outbreak of COVID-19
infection can be brought under control with the
adoption of strategic preventive and _ control
measures along with the early isolation of
subsequent cases in the coming days. Studies also
report that since air traffic between China and
African countries increased many times over in the
decade after the SARS outbreak, African countries
need to be vigilant to prevent the spread of novel
coronavirus in Africa (225). Due to fear of virus
spread, Wuhan City was completely shut down
(233). The immediate control of the ongoing
COVID-19 outbreaks appears a mammoth task,
especially for developing countries, due to their
inability to allocate quarantine stations that could
screen infected individuals’ movements (234). Such
underdeveloped countries should divert their
resources and energy to enforcing the primary level
of preventive measures, like controlling the entry of
individuals from China or countries where the
disease has flared up, isolating the infected
individuals, and quarantining individuals with
suspected infection. Most of the sub-Saharan African
countries have a fragile health system that can be
crippled in the event of an outbreak. Effective
management of COVID-19 would be difficult for
low-income countries due to their inability to
respond rapidly due to the lack of an efficient health
care system (65). Controlling the imported cases is
critical in preventing the spread of COVID-19 to
other countries that have not reported the disease
until now. The possibility of an imported case of
COVID-19 leading to sustained human-to-human
transmission was estimated to be 0.41. This can be
reduced to a value of 0.012 by decreasing the mean
time from the onset of symptoms to hospitalization
and can only be made possible by using intense
disease surveillance systems (235). The silent
importations of infected individuals (before the
manifestation of clinical signs) also contributed
significantly to the spread of disease across the
major cities of the world. Even though the travel ban
was implemented in Wuhan (89), infected persons
who traveled out of the city just before the
imposition of the ban might have remained
undetected and resulted in local outbreaks (236).
Emerging novel diseases like COVID-19 are difficult
to contain within the country of origin, since
globalization has led to a world without borders.
Hence, international collaboration plays a vital role
We also predict the possibility of another
outbreak, as predicted by Fan et al. (6). Indeed, the
present outbreak caused by SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-
19) was expected. Similar to previous outbreaks, the
current outbreak also will be contained shortly.
However, the real issue is how we are planning to
counter the next zoonotic CoV epidemic that is likely
to occur within the next 5 to 10 years or even sooner

(Fig. 7).
CONCLUDING REMARKS

Several years after the global SARS epidemic,
the current SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic has
served as a reminder of how novel pathogens can
rapidly emerge and spread through the human
population and eventually cause severe public health
crises. Further research should be conducted to
establish animal models for SARS-CoV-2_ to
investigate replication, transmission dynamics, and
pathogenesis in humans. This may help develop and
evaluate potential therapeutic strategies against
zoonotic CoV epidemics. Present trends suggest the
occurrence of future outbreaks of CoVs due to
changes in the climate, and ecological conditions
may be associated with human-animal contact. Live-
animal markets, such as the Huanan South China
Seafood Market, represent ideal conditions for
interspecies contact of wildlife with domestic birds,
pigs, and mammals, which substantially increases
the probability of interspecies transmission of CoV
infections and could result in high risks to humans
due to adaptive genetic recombination in these
viruses (323-325).

The COVID-19-associated symptoms are fever,
cough, expectoration, headache, and myalgia or
fatigue. Individuals with asymptomatic and atypical
clinical manifestations were also identified recently,
further adding to the complexity of disease
transmission dynamics. Atypical clinical
manifestations may only express symptoms such as
fatigue instead of respiratory signs such as fever,
cough, and sputum. In such cases, the clinician must
be vigilant for the possible occurrence of
asymptomatic and atypical clinical manifestations to
avoid the possibility of missed diagnoses.

The present outbreak caused by SARS-CoV-2
was, indeed, expected. Similar to previous outbreaks,
the current pandemic also will be contained shortly.
However, the real question is, how are we planning
to counter the next zoonotic CoV epidemic that is
likely to occur within the next 5 to 10 years or
perhaps sooner? Our knowledge of most of the bat
CoVs is scarce, as these viruses have not been
isolated and studied, and extensive studies on such
viruses are typically only conducted when they are
associated with specific disease outbreaks. The next
step following the control of the COVID-19 outbreak
in China should be focused on _ screening,
identification, isolation, and characterization of
CoVs_ present in wildlife species of China,
particularly in bats. Both in vitro and in vivo studies
(using suitable animal models) should be conducted
(using sultable animal modeis) snouid be Conaucted
to evaluate the risk of future epidemics. Presently,
licensed antiviral drugs or vaccines against SARS-
CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 are lacking.
However, advances in designing antiviral drugs and
vaccines against several other emerging diseases will
help develop suitable therapeutic agents against
COVID-19 in a short time. Until then, we must rely
exclusively on various control and prevention
measures to prevent this new disease from becoming
a pandemic.
4 VIROLOGY

Coronaviruses, a family of viruses within the
nidoviruses superfamily, are further classified
according to their genera, alpha-, beta-, gamma-
and deltacoronaviruses (a-, B-, y- and 5-).
Among those, alpha and beta species are
capable of contaminating only mammals,
whereas the other two genera can infect birds
and could also infect mammals.'* '* Two of
these genera belong to human coronaviruses
(HCoVs): a-coronaviruses, which comprise
human coronavirus 229E (hcov229E) and
human coronavirus NL63 (hcovNL63), and B-
coronaviruses, which are human coronavirus
HKU1, human coronavirus OC43, MERS-COV
(known as Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus) and SARS-CoV (referred to as
severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus). '°

The severe acute respiratory syndrome CoV-2
(SARS-CoV-2) is now named novel COVID-19
(coronavirus disease 2019).'° Genome
sequencing and phylogenetic research revealed
that the COVID-19-causing coronavirus is a
beta-coronavirus that belongs to the same
subtypes as SARS virus, but still exists in a
variant group. The receptor-binding gene region

rn . et z rn a ral ~ an
variant group. The receptor-binding gene region
appears to be very similar to that of the SARS-
CoV and it is believed that the same receptor
would be used for cell entry. |7

4.1 Virion structure and its
genome

Coronaviruses are structurally enveloped,
belonging to the positive-strand RNA viruses
category that has the largest known genomes of
RNA. The structures of the coronavirus are
more spherical in shape, but their structure has
the potential to modify their morphology in
response to environmental conditions, being
pleomorphic. The capsular membrane which
represents the outer envelope usually has
glycoprotein projection and covers the nucleus,
comprising a matrix protein containing a
positive-strand RNA. Since the structure
possesses 5'-capped and 3'-polyadenylated
ends, it remains identical to the cellular
mRNAs.'® The structure is comprised of
hemagglutinin esterase (HE) (present only in
some beta-coronaviruses), spike (S), small
membrane (E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid
(N), as shown (Figure 1). The envelope
containing glycoprotein is responsible for
attachment to the host cell, which possesses the
primary anti-genic epitopes mainly those
primary anti-genic epitopes mainly those
recognised by neutralising antibodies. The spike
S-protein being in a spike form is subjected to a
structural rearrangement process so that fusing
the outer membrane of the virus with the host-
cell membrane becomes easier.'* 7° Recent
SARS-CoV work has also shown that the
membrane exopeptidase ACE enzyme
(angiotensin-converting enzyme) functions as a
COVID-19 receptor to enter the human cell.*'

-HE

FIGURE 1
4.2 Viral replication

Usually replication of coronavirus occurs within
the cytoplasm and is closely associated with
endoplasmic reticulum and other cellular
membrane organelles. Human coronaviruses
are thought to invade cells, primarily through
different receptors. For 229E and OC43, amino
peptidase-N (AP-N) and a sialic acid containing
receptor, respectively, were known to function
in this role. After the virus enters the host cell
and uncoating process occurs, the genome is
transcribed, and then, translated. A
characteristic feature of replication is that all
mRNAs form an enclosed group of typical 3’
ends; only the special portions of the 5’ ends
are translated. In total, about 7 MRNAs are
produced. The shortest MRNA codes and the
others can express the synthesis of another
genome segment for nucleoprotein. At the cell
membrane, these proteins are collected and
genomic RNA is initiated as a mature particle
type by burgeoning from internal cell
membranes.2 2°

5 PATHOGENESIS

Coronaviruses are tremendously precise and
mature in most of the airway epithelial cells as
observed through both in vivo and in vitro
observed through both in vivo and in vitro
experiments. There is an enhanced nasal
secretion observed along with local oedema
because of the damage of the host cell, which
further stimulates the synthesis of
inflammatory mediators. In addition, these
reactions can induce sneezing, difficulty
breathing by causing airway inhibition and
elevate mucosal temperature. These viruses,
when released, chiefly affect the lower
respiratory tract, with the signs and symptoms
existing clinically. Also, the virus further affects
the intestinal lymphocytes, renal cells, liver cells
and T-lymphocytes. Furthermore, the virus
induces T-cell apoptosis, causing the reaction of
the T-cell to be erratic, resulting in the immune
system's complete collapse.** 7°

5.1 Mode of transmission

In fact it was accepted that the original
transmission originated from a seafood market,
which had a tradition of selling live animals,
where the majority of the patients had either
worked or visited, although up to now the
understanding of the COVID-19 transmission
risk remains incomplete. '° In addition, while the
newer patients had no exposure to the market
and still got the virus from the humans present
there, there is an increase in the outbreak of
there, there is an increase in the outbreak of
this virus through human-to-human
transmission, with the fact that it has become
widespread around the globe. This confirms the
fact similar to the previous epidemics, including
SARS and MERS, that this coronavirus exhibited
potential human-to-human transmission, as it
was recently declared a pandemic by WHO.?°

Respiratory droplets are the major carrier for
coronavirus transmission. Such droplets can
either stay in the nose or mouth or enter the
lungs via the inhaled air. Currently, it is known
that COVID-19’s transmission from one person
to another also occurs through touching either
an infected surface or even an object. With the
current scant awareness of the transmission
systems however, airborne safety measures
with a high-risk procedure have been proposed
in many countries. Transmission levels, or the
rates from one person to another, reported
differ by both location and interaction with
involvement in infection control. It is stated that
even asymptomatic individuals or those
individuals in their incubation period can act as
carrier of SARS-CoV2.7” 2° With the data and
evidence provided by the CDC, the usual
incubation period is probably 3 to 7 days,
sometimes being prolonged up to even 2
weeks, and the typical symptom occurrence
weeks, and the typical symptom occurrence
from incubation period to infection takes an
average of 12.5 days.?

6 CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS

The symptoms of COVID-19 remain very similar
to those of the other respiratory epidemics in
the past, which include SARS and MERS, but
here the range of symptoms includes mild
rhinitis to septic shock. Some intestinal
disturbances were reported with the other
epidemics, but COVID-19 was devoid of such
symptoms. When examined, unilateral or
bilateral involvement compatible with viral
pneumonia is observed in the patients, and
bilateral multiple lobular and sub-segmental
consolidation areas were observed in patients
hospitalised in the intensive care unit.
Comorbid patients showed a more severe
clinical course than predicted from previous
epidemics. Diagnosis of COVID-19 includes the
complete history of travel and touch, with
laboratory testing. It is more preferable to
choose serological screening, which can help to
analyse even the asymptomatic infections;
several serological tests are in progress for
SARS-CoV-2. | 2°
6.1 Laboratory testing for
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19) in suspected human cases

The assessment of the patients with COVID-19
should be based on the clinical features and
also epidemiological factors. The screening
protocols must be prepared and followed per
the native context.*' Collecting and testing of
specimen samples from the suspected
individual is considered to be one of the main
principles for controlling and managing the
outbreak of the disease in a country. The
suspected cases must be screened thoroughly
in order to detect the virus with the help of
nucleic acid amplification tests such as reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-
PCR). If a country or a particular region does not
have the facility to test the specimens, the
specimens of the suspected individual should
be sent to the nearest reference laboratories
per the list provided by WHO.°2

It is also recommended that the suspected
patients be tested for the other respiratory
pathogens by performing the routine laboratory
investigation per the local guidelines, mainly to
differentiate from other viruses that include
influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus,
respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, human
respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, human
metapneumovirus and SARS coronavirus. It is
advisable to distinguish COVID-19 from other
pneumonias such as mycoplasma pneumonia,
chlamydia pneumonia and bacterial
pneumonia.*? Several published pieces of
literature based on the novel coronavirus
reported in China declared that stool and blood
samples can also collected from the suspected
persons in order to detect the virus. However,
respiratory samples show better viability in
identifying the virus, in comparison with the
other specimens.**-°°

6.2 Nucleic acid amplification tests
(NAAT) for COVID-19 virus

The gold standard method of confirming the
suspected cases of COVID-19 is carried out by
detecting the unique sequences of virus RNA
through reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) along with nucleic acid
sequencing if needed. The various genes of
virus identified so far include N, E, S (N:
nucleocapsid protein, E: envelope protein gene,
S: spike protein gene) and RdRP genes (RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase gene).°7
6.3 Serological testing

Serological surveys are also considered to be
one of the most effective ones in facilitating
outbreak investigation and it also helps us to
derive a retrospective assessment of the
disease by estimating the attack rate.°7
According to the recent literature, paired serum
samples can also help clinicians to diagnose
COVID-19 in case of false negative results in
NAAT essays.” The literature also declared that
the commercial and non-commercial serological
tests are under consideration in order to
support the practising clinicians by assisting
them in diagnosis. Similarly, there are studies
published on COVID-19 which are comprised of
the serological data on clinical samples.*® °°

6.4 Viral sequencing

Apart from confirming the presence of virus in
the specimens, viral sequencing is also quite
useful in monitoring the viral genomic
mutations, which plays a very significant role in
influencing the performance of the medical
countermeasures inclusive of the diagnostic
test. Genomic sequencing of the virus can also
help further in developing several studies
related to molecular epidemiology.°*
6.5 specimen colection and
storage

A Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab
should be collected using Dacron or polyester
flocked swabs. It should be transported to the
laboratory at a temperature of 4°C and stored
in the laboratory between 4 and -70°C on the
basis of the number of days and, in order to
increase the viral load, both nasopharyngeal
and oropharyngeal swabs should be placed in
the same tube. Bronchoalveolar lavage and
nasopharyngeal aspirate should be collected in
a sterile container and transported similarly to
the laboratory by maintain a temperature of
A°C.

Sputum samples, especially from the lower
respiratory tract, should be collected with the
help of a sterile container and stored, whereas
tissue from a biopsy or autopsy should be
collected using a sterile container along with
saline. However, both should be stored in the
laboratory at a temperature that ranges
between 4 and -70°C. Whole blood for
detecting the antigen, particularly in the first
week of illness, should be collected ina
collecting tube and stored in the laboratory
between 4 and -70°C. Urine samples must also
be collected using a sterile container and stored
between 4 and -70°C. Urine samples must also
be collected using a sterile container and stored
in the laboratory at a temperature that ranges
between 4 and -70°C.°*

7 PREGNANCY

Currently, there is a paucity of knowledge and
data related to the consequences of COVID-19
during pregnancy.4°*2 However, pregnant
women seem to have a high risk of developing
severe infection and complications during the
recent 2019-nCoV outbreak.*'"*? This
speculation was based on previous available
scientific reports on coronaviruses during
pregnancy (SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV) as well as
the limited number of COVID-19 cases.*'-4°
Analysing the clinical features and outcomes of
10 newborns (including two sets of twins) in
China, whose mothers are confirmed cases of
COVID-19, revealed that perinatal infection with
2019-nCoV may lead to adverse outcomes for
the neonates, for example, premature labour,
respiratory distress, thrombocytopenia with
abnormal liver function and even death.” It is
still unclear whether or not the COVID-19
infection can be transmitted during pregnancy
to the foetus through the transplacental
route.** A recent case series report, which
assessed intrauterine vertical transmission of
assessed intrauterine vertical transmission of
COVID-19 infection in nine infants born to
infected mothers, found that none of the
infants tested positive for the virus.*° Likewise,
there was no evidence of intrauterine infection
caused by vertical transmission in the SARS and
MERS epidemics.*?

The CDC asserts that infants born to mothers
with confirmed COVID-19 are considered
persons under investigation (PUI) and should be
temporarily separated from the mother and
isolated.*°

7.1 Breastfeeding and infant care

The data available to date is limited and cannot
confirm whether or not COVID-19 can be
transmitted through breast milk.*° Assessing
the presence of COVID-19 in breast milk
samples from six patients showed negative
result.*° The CDC points out that in case of a
confirmed or suspected COVID-19 infection, the
decision of whether or how to start or continue
breastfeeding should be made by the mother in
collaboration with the family and healthcare
practitioners.*’ Careful precautions need to be
taken by the mother to prevent transmitting the
disease to her infant through respiratory
droplets during breastfeeding. This includes
wearing a facemask and practising hand
wearing a facemask and practising hand
hygiene before feeding the baby. In addition, it
is advisable that breast pumps are cleaned
properly after each use and, if possible, a
healthy individual is available to feed the
expressed breast milk to the infant.4+

7.2 Children and elderly
population

On the basis of the available reports, COVID-19
among children accounted for 1-5% of the
confirmed cases, and this population does not
seem to be at higher risk for the disease than
adults. There is no difference in the COVID-19
symptoms between adults and children.
However, the available evidence indicated that
children diagnosed with COVID-19 have milder
symptoms than the adults, with a low mortality
rate.*® 9 On the contrary, older people who are
above the age of 65 years are at higher risk fora
severe course of disease. In the United Stated,
approximately 31-59% of those with confirmed
COVID-19 between the ages of 65 and 84 years
old required hospitalisation, 11-31% of them
required admission to the intensive care unit,
and 4-11% died.°°
8 PREVENTION

The WHO and other agencies such as the CDC
have published protective measures to mitigate
the spread of COVID-19. This involves frequent
hand washing with handwash containing 60% of
alcohol and soap for at least 20 seconds.
Another important measure is avoiding close
contact with sick people and keeping a social
distance of 1 metre always to everyone who is
coughing and sneezing. Not touching the nose,
eyes and mouth was also suggested. While
coughing or sneezing, covering the mouth and
nose with a cloth/tissue or the bent elbow is
advised. Staying at home is recommended for
those who are sick, and wearing a facial mask is
advised when going out among people.
Furthermore, it is recommended to clean and
sterilise frequently touched surfaces such as
phones and doorknobs on a daily basis.°' °7
Staying at home as much as possible is
advisable for those who are at higher risk for
severe illness, to minimise the risk of exposure
to COVID-19 during outbreaks.°°
severe illness, to minimise the risk of exposure
to COVID-19 during outbreaks.°°

9 VACCINES

The strange coronavirus outbreak in the
Chinese city of Wuhan, now termed COVID-19,
and its rapid transmission, threatens people
around the world. Because of its pandemic
nature, the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and pharmaceutical companies are involved in
the development of COVID-19 vaccines. Xu
Nanping, China’s vice-minister of science and
technology, announced that the first vaccine is
expected to be ready for clinical trials in China
at the end of April 2020.°* There is no approved
vaccine and treatment for COVID-19 infections.

Vaccine development is sponsored and
supported by the Biomedical Advanced
Research and Development Authority (BARDA),
a component of the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Preparedness and Response
(ASPR). Sanofi will use its egg-free, recombinant
DNA technology to produce an exact genetic
match to proteins of the virus.°°
10 RECOMBINANT SUBUNIT
VACCINE

Clover Biopharmaceuticals is producing a
recombinant subunit vaccine based on the
trimeric S-protein of COVID-19.°° The oral
recombinant vaccine is being expanded by
Vaxart in tablet formulation, using its
proprietary oral vaccine platform.

11 CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
AND TREATMENT

In severe COVID-19 cases, treatment should be
given to support vital organ functions. People
who think they may have been exposed to
COVID-19 should contact their healthcare
provider immediately. Healthcare personnel
should care for patients in an Airborne Infection
Isolation Room (AIIR). Precautions must be
taken by the healthcare professional, such as
contact precautions and airborne precautions
with eye protection.°°

Individuals with a mild clinical presentation may
not require primary hospitalisation. Close
monitoring is needed for the persons infected
with COVID-19. Elderly patients and those with
prevailing chronic medical conditions such as
prevailing chronic medical conditions such as
lung disease, heart failure, cancer,
cerebrovascular disease, renal disease,
diabetes, liver disease and
immunocompromising conditions and
pregnancy are risk factors for developing severe
illness. Management includes implementation
of prevention and control measures and
supportive therapy to manage the
complications, together with advanced organ
support.°”

Corticosteroids must be avoided unless
specified for chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease exacerbation or septic shock, as it is
likely to prolong viral replication as detected in
MERS-CoV patients.°®

12 EARLY SUPPORTIVE
THERAPY AND MONITORING

Management of patients with suspected or
documented COVID-19 consists of ensuring
appropriate infection control and supportive
care. WHO and the CDC posted clinical guidance
for COVID-19.°°

Immediate therapy of add-on oxygen must be
started for patients with severe acute
respiratory infection (SARI) and respiratory
respiratory infection (SARI) and respiratory
distress, shock or hypoxaemia. Patients with
SARI can be given conservative fluid therapy
only when there is no evidence of shock.
Empiric antimicrobial therapy must be started
to manage SARI. For patients with sepsis,
antimicrobials must be administered within 1
hour of initial assessments. The WHO and CDC
recommend that glucocorticoids not be used in
patients with COVID-19 pneumonia except
where there are other indications (exacerbation
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).°?

Patients’ clinical deterioration is closely
observed with SARI; however, rapidly
progressive respiratory failure and sepsis
require immediate supportive care
interventions comprising quick use of
neuromuscular blockade and sedatives,
hemodynamic management, nutritional
support, maintenance of blood glucose levels,
prompt assessment and treatment of
nosocomial pneumonia, and prophylaxis
against deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding.®° Generally, such
patients give way to their primary illness to
secondary complications like sepsis or
multiorgan system failure.*°
13 CONVALESCENT PLASMA
THERAPY

Guo Yanhong, an official with the National
Health Commission (NHC), stated that
convalescent plasma therapy is a significant
method for treating severe COVID-19 patients.
Among the COVID-19 patients currently
receiving convalescent plasma therapy in the
virus-hit Wuhan, one has been discharged from
hospital, as reported by Chinese science
authorities on Monday, 17th February 2020 in
Beijing. The first dose of convalescent plasma
from a COVID-19 patient was collected on 1st
and 9th February 2020 from a severely ill
patient who was given treatment at a hospital in
Jiangxia District in Wuhan. The presence of the
virus in patients is minimised by the antibodies
in the convalescent plasma. Guiqiang stated
that donating plasma may cause minimal harm
to the donor and that there is nothing to be
worried about. Plasma donors must be cured
patients and discharged from hospital. Only
plasma is used, whereas red blood cells (RBC),
white blood cells (WBC) and blood platelets are
transfused back into the donor's body. Wang
alleged that donor's plasma will totally improve
to its initial state after one or 2 weeks from the
day of plasma donation of around 200 to 300
14 ANTIVIRAL THERAPY

COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by
SARS-CoV-2, which is also termed the novel
coronavirus and is diligently associated with the
SARS virus. The Ministry of Science and
Technology from the People’s Republic of China
declared three potential antiviral medicines
suitable for treating COVID-19. Those three
medicines are, namely, Favilavir, chloroquine
phosphate and remdesivir. A clinical trial was
conducted to test the efficacy of those three
drugs, and the results proved that out of the
three medicines above only Favilavir is effective
in treating the patients with novel coronavirus.
The remaining two drugs were effective in
treating malaria.°7

Likewise a study carried out in the United States
by the National Institute of Health proved that
remdesivir is effective in treating the Middle
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-
CoV), which is also a type of coronavirus that
was transmitted from monkeys. The drug
remdesivir was also used in the United States
for treating the patients with COVID-19. There
has been a proposal to use the combination of
protease inhibitors lopinavir-ritonavir for
treating the patients affected by COVID-19.°%
Itis also evident that remdesivir was effective in
treating the patients who were infected with
Ebola virus. Per this evidence, China has already
started testing the efficacy of remdesivir in
treating the patients with COVID-19, especially
in Wuhan, where the outbreak occurred.
Chloroquine, which is an existing drug which is
currently used in treating malaria cases, was
given to more than 100 patients who were
affected with novel coronavirus to test its
efficacy.°7

A multicentric study was conducted in China to
test the effectiveness of remdesivir in treating
the patients with COVID-19. Thus, the results of
the clinical trial proved that remdesivir has a
considerably acceptable level of efficacy for
treating the patients with COVID-19. Therefore,
the National Health Commission of the People's
Republic of China decided to include remdesivir
in the Guidelines for the Prevention, Diagnosis
and Treatment of Pneumonia Caused by COVID-
49.62

Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are
existing anti-malaria drugs also given to more
than 30 patients infected with COVID-19 in
Guangdong province and Hunan province to
test their effectiveness and efficacy. Thus, the
results of the clinical trial showed that the
07:29 ~ Oe 948
e All clinicians should keep
themselves updated about recent
developments including global

spread of the disease.

e Non-essential international travel

should be avoided at this time.

e People should stop spreading
myths and false information about
the disease and try to allay panic

and anxiety of the public.

Conclusions

This new virus outbreak has
challenged the economic, medical and
public health infrastructure of China
and to some extent, of other countries
especially, its neighbours. Time alone
will tell how the virus will impact our
lives here in India. More so, future
outbreaks of viruses and pathogens of
zoonotic origin are likely to continue.
Therefore, apart from curbing this

outbreak. efforts should be made to
07:9 7 @ Oe ain |

themselves while examining such
patients and practice hand

hygiene frequently.

Suspected cases should be referred
to government designated centres
for isolation and testing (in
Mumbai, at this time, it is Kasturba
hospital). Commercial kits for
testing are not yet available in

India.

Patients admitted with severe
pneumonia and acute respiratory
distress syndrome should be
evaluated for travel history and
placed under contact and droplet
isolation. Regular
decontamination of surfaces
should be done. They should be
tested for etiology using multiplex
PCR panels if logistics permit and
if no pathogen is identified, refer
the samples for testing for SARS-
CoV-2.
07:9 7 @ Oe ain |

Practice Points from an Indian
Perspective

At the time of writing this article, the

risk of coronavirus in India is

extremely low. But that may change in

the next few weeks. Hence the

following is recommended:

Healthcare providers should take
travel history of all patients with
respiratory symptoms, and any
international travel in the past 2
wks as well as contact with sick
people who have travelled

internationally.

They should set up a system of
triage of patients with respiratory
illness in the outpatient
department and give them a
simple surgical mask to wear.
They should use surgical masks

themselves while examining such

< @ |
07:28 @ Owe ain |

ro ro ro a

(entertainment parks etc). China is also
considering introducing legislation to
prohibit selling and trading of wild

animals [32].

The international response has been
dramatic. Initially, there were massive
travel restrictions to China and people
returning from China/ evacuated from
China are being evaluated for clinical
symptoms, isolated and tested for
COVID-19 for 2 wks even if
asymptomatic. However, now with
rapid world wide spread of the virus
these travel restrictions have extended
to other countries. Whether these
efforts will lead to slowing of viral

spread is not known.

A candidate vaccine is under

development.

Practice Points from an Indian
Perspective

<q @ B
07:28 MW Ore avin |
pandemic flu where patients were

asked to resume work/school once
afebrile for 24 h or by day 7 of illness.
Negative molecular tests were nota

prerequisite for discharge.

At the community level, people should
be asked to avoid crowded areas and
postpone non-essential travel to places
with ongoing transmission. They
should be asked to practice cough
hygiene by coughing in sleeve/ tissue
rather than hands and practice hand
hygiene frequently every 15-20 min.
Patients with respiratory symptoms
should be asked to use surgical masks.
The use of mask by healthy people in
public places has not shown to protect
against respiratory viral infections and
is currently not recommended by
WHO. However, in China, the public
has been asked to wear masks in public
and especially in crowded places and
large scale gatherings are prohibited

(entertainment parks etc). China is also
07:28 MW Ore 748
category A agents (cholera, plague).
Patients should be placed in separate
rooms or cohorted together. Negative
pressure rooms are not generally
needed. The rooms and surfaces and
equipment should undergo regular
decontamination preferably with
sodium hypochlorite. Healthcare
workers should be provided with fit
tested N95 respirators and protective
suits and goggles. Airborne
transmission precautions should be
taken during aerosol generating
procedures such as intubation, suction
and tracheostomies. All contacts
including healthcare workers should
be monitored for development of
symptoms of COVID-19. Patients can be
discharged from isolation once they
are afebrile for atleast 3 d and have
two consecutive negative molecular
tests at 1 d sampling interval. This
recommendation is different from

pandemic flu where patients were
07:28 MW Ore avin |
mask and practice cough hygiene.
Caregivers should be asked to wear a
surgical mask when in the same room
as patient and use hand hygiene every

15-20 min.

The greatest risk in COVID-19 is
transmission to healthcare workers. In
the SARS outbreak of 2002, 21% of
those affected were healthcare workers
[31]. Till date, almost 1500 healthcare
workers in China have been infected
with 6 deaths. The doctor who first
warned about the virus has died too. It
is important to protect healthcare
workers to ensure continuity of care
and to prevent transmission of
infection to other patients. While
COVID-19 transmits as a droplet
pathogen and is placed in Category B of
infectious agents (highly pathogenic
H5N1 and SARS), by the China National
Health Commission, infection control

measures recommended are those for
07:27 BM Owe ban |

Prevention [21, 30]

Since at this time there are no
approved treatments for this infection,
prevention is crucial. Several
properties of this virus make
prevention difficult namely, non-
specific features of the disease, the
infectivity even before onset of
symptoms in the incubation period,
transmission from asymptomatic
people, long incubation period, tropism
for mucosal surfaces such as the
conjunctiva, prolonged duration of the
illness and transmission even after

clinical recovery.

Isolation of confirmed or suspected
cases with mild illness at home is
recommended. The ventilation at home
should be good with sunlight to allow
for destruction of virus. Patients should
be asked to wear a simple surgical

mask and practice cough hygiene.
07:27 BM Owe 748
OQ — @ ncbinim.nih.gov/pmc/arti

[median 17 d]. In the case series of
children discussed earlier, all children
recovered with basic treatment and did

not need intensive care [17].

There is anecdotal experience with use
of remdeswir, a broad spectrum anti
RNA drug developed for Ebola in
management of COVID-19 [27]. More
evidence is needed before these drugs
are recommended. Other drugs
proposed for therapy are arbidol (an
antiviral drug available in Russia and
China), intravenous immunoglobulin,
interferons, chloroquine and plasma of
patients recovered from COVID-19 [21,
28, 29]. Additionally, recommendations
about using traditional Chinese herbs
find place in the Chinese guidelines
[21].

Prevention [21, 30]
07:27 BM Owe ain |

a

been used based on the experience
with SARS and MERS. In a historical
control study in patients with SARS,
patients treated with lopinavir-
ritonavir with ribavirin had better
outcomes as compared to those given

ribavirin alone [15].

In the case series of 99 hospitalized
patients with COVID-19 infection from
Wuhan, oxygen was given to 76%, non-
invasive ventilation in 13%,
mechanical ventilation in 4%,
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) in 3%, continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) in 9%,
antibiotics in 71%, antifungals in 15%,
glucocorticoids in 19% and intravenous
immunoglobulin therapy in 27% [15].
Antiviral therapy consisting of
oseltamivir, ganciclovir and lopinavir-
ritonavir was given to 75% of the
patients. The duration of non-invasive

ventilation was 4-22 d [median 9 d]
07:27 Owe 748
prongs, face mask, high flow nasal
cannula (HFNC) or non-invasive
ventilation is indicated. Mechanical
ventilation and even extra corporeal
membrane oxygen support may be
needed. Renal replacement therapy
may be needed in some. Antibiotics
and antifungals are required if co-
infections are suspected or proven. The
role of corticosteroids is unproven;
while current international consensus
and WHO advocate against their use,
Chinese guidelines do recommend
short term therapy with low-to-
moderate dose corticosteroids in
COVID-19 ARDS [24, 25]. Detailed
guidelines for critical care
management for COVID-19 have been
published by the WHO [26]. There is, as
of now, no approved treatment for
COVID-19. Antiviral drugs such as
ribavirin, lopinavir-ritonavir have
been used based on the experience
with SARS and MERS. In a historical
07:27 MOrxe 748
infections clinically or through routine
lab tests. Therefore travel history
becomes important. However, as the
epidemic spreads, the travel history

will become irrelevant.

Treatment [21, 23]

Treatment is essentially supportive and

symptomatic.

The first step is to ensure adequate
isolation (discussed later) to prevent
transmission to other contacts, patients
and healthcare workers. Mild illness
should be managed at home with
counseling about danger signs. The
usual principles are maintaining
hydration and nutrition and
controlling fever and cough. Routine
use of antibiotics and antivirals such as
oseltamivir should be avoided in
confirmed cases. In hypoxic patients,
provision of oxygen through nasal

prongs, face mask, high flow nasal
07:27 BM Owe ban |

OQ — @ ncbinim.nih.gov/pmc/arti
glass opacities and sub segmental
consolidation. It is also abnormal in
asymptomatic patients/ patients with
no clinical evidence of lower
respiratory tract involvement. In fact,
abnormal CT scans have been used to
diagnose COVID-19 in suspect cases
with negative molecular diagnosis;
many of these patients had positive

molecular tests on repeat testing [22].

Differential Diagnosis [21]

The differential diagnosis includes all
types of respiratory viral infections
[influenza, parainfluenza, respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), adenovirus,
human metapneumovirus, non COVID-
19 coronavirus], atypical organisms
(mycoplasma, chlamydia) and bacterial
infections. It is not possible to
differentiate COVID-19 from these

infections clinically or through routine

BS
0725m Ore avin |
consolidation. It is also abnormal in

asymptomatic patients/ patients with
no clinical evidence of lower
respiratory tract involvement. In fact,
abnormal CT scans have been used to
diagnose COVID-19 in suspect cases
with negative molecular diagnosis;
many of these patients had positive

molecular tests on repeat testing [22].

Differential Diagnosis [21]

The differential diagnosis includes all
types of respiratory viral infections
[influenza, parainfluenza, respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), adenovirus,
human metapneumovirus, non COVID-
19 coronavirus], atypical organisms
(mycoplasma, chlamydia) and bacterial
infections. It is not possible to
differentiate COVID-19 from these
infections clinically or through routine
lab tests. Therefore travel history
becomes important. However, as the
epidemic spreads, the travel history
07:25 MOre 748
epidemic progresses, commercial tests

will become available.

Other laboratory investigations are
usually non specific. The white cell
count is usually normal or low. There
may be lymphopenia; a lymphocyte
count <1000 has been associated with
severe disease. The platelet count is
usually normal or mildly low. The CRP
and ESR are generally elevated but
procalcitonin levels are usually
normal. A high procalcitonin level may
indicate a bacterial co-infection. The
ALT/AST, prothrombin time, creatinine,
D-dimer, CPK and LDH may be elevated
and high levels are associated with

severe disease.

The chest X-ray (CXR) usually shows
bilateral infiltrates but may be normal
in early disease. The CT is more
sensitive and specific. CT imaging
generally shows infiltrates, ground

glass opacities and sub segmental
07:5 Owe ban |

of persistent local transmission or
contact with patients with similar
travel history or those with confirmed
COVID-19 infection. However cases
may be asymptomatic or even without
fever. A confirmed case is a suspect

case with a positive molecular test.

Specific diagnosis is by specific
molecular tests on respiratory samples
(throat swab/ nasopharyngeal swab/
sputum/ endotracheal aspirates and
bronchoalveolar lavage). Virus may
also be detected in the stool and in
severe cases, the blood. It must be
remembered that the multiplex PCR
panels currently available do not
include the COVID-19. Commercial tests
are also not available at present. Ina
suspect case in India, the appropriate
sample has to be sent to designated
reference labs in India or the National
Institute of Virology in Pune. As the

epidemic progresses, commercial tests
07:5 MOwxs v4i
was linked to a family member and 26
children had history of
travel/residence to Hubei province in
China. All the patients were either
asymptomatic (9%) or had mild
disease. No severe or critical cases
were seen. The most common
symptoms were fever (50%) and cough
(38%). All patients recovered with
symptomatic therapy and there were
no deaths. One case of severe
pneumonia and multiorgan
dysfunction in a child has also been
reported [19]. Similarly the neonatal
cases that have been reported have
been mild [20].

Diagnosis [21]

A suspect case is defined as one with
fever, sore throat and cough who has
history of travel to China or other areas
of persistent local transmission or
contact with patients with similar

travel histarv or thase with confirmed
07:5 Owe ain |

Interestingly, disease in patients
outside Hubei province has been
reported to be milder than those from
Wuhan [17]. Similarly, the severity and
case fatality rate in patients outside
China has been reported to be milder
[6]. This may either be due to selection
bias wherein the cases reporting from
Wuhan included only the severe cases
or due to predisposition of the Asian
population to the virus due to higher
expression of ACE, receptors on the

respiratory mucosa [11].

Disease in neonates, infants and
children has been also reported to be
significantly milder than their adult
counterparts. In a series of 34 children
admitted to a hospital in Shenzhen,
China between January 19th and
February 7th, there were 14 males and
20 females. The median age was 8 y 11
mo and in 28 children the infection

was linked to a family member and 26
07:5 Owe ban |
including 1L2, 1L7, 1L10, GCSF, 1P10,

MCP1, MIP1A, and TNFa [15]. The
median time from onset of symptoms
to dyspnea was 5 d, hospitalization 7d
and acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) 8 d. The need for
intensive care admission was in 25-
30% of affected patients in published
series. Complications witnessed
included acute lung injury, ARDS,
shock and acute kidney injury.
Recovery started in the 2nd or 3rd wk.
The median duration of hospital stay in
those who recovered was 10 d. Adverse
outcomes and death are more common
in the elderly and those with
underlying co-morbidities (50-75% of
fatal cases). Fatality rate in hospitalized
adult patients ranged from 4 to 11%.
The overall case fatality rate is
estimated to range between 2 and 3%

[2].

Interestingly, disease in patients

outside Hubei province has been
07:5 Owe ban |

OQ — @ ncbinim.nih.gov/pmc/arti

identified angiotensin receptor 2
(ACE,) as the receptor through which
the virus enters the respiratory mucosa
[11].

The basic case reproduction rate (BCR)
is estimated to range from 2 to 6.47 in
various modelling studies [11]. In
comparison, the BCR of SARS was 2 and
1.3 for pandemic flu H1N1 2009 [2].

Clinical Features [8, 15-18]

The clinical features of COVID-19 are
varied, ranging from asymptomatic
state to acute respiratory distress
syndrome and multi organ
dysfunction. The common clinical
features include fever (not in all),
cough, sore throat, headache, fatigue,
headache, myalgia and breathlessness.
Conjunctivitis has also been described.

Thus, they are indistinguishable from
athar racniratariy infactinne Tn 9a eitheat

BS
07:5 Owe ain |
UL UPI1TLdS Call opl cdu 1-2 LLt aALLu UepYdsIe

on surfaces. The virus can remain
viable on surfaces for days in
favourable atmospheric conditions but
are destroyed in less than a minute by
common disinfectants like sodium
hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide etc.
[13]. Infection is acquired either by
inhalation of these droplets or touching
surfaces contaminated by them and
then touching the nose, mouth and
eyes. The virus is also present in the
stool and contamination of the water
supply and subsequent transmission
via aerosolization/feco oral route is
also hypothesized [6]. As per current
information, transplacental
transmission from pregnant women to
their fetus has not been described [14].
However, neonatal disease due to post
natal transmission is described [14].
The incubation period varies from 2 to
14 d [median 5 d]. Studies have

identified angiotensin receptor 2

(ACF.\ ac tha rarantnr thraich wrhich
07:5 Owe 7 Ai

Epidemiology and Pathogenesis
[10, 11]

All ages are susceptible. Infection is
transmitted through large droplets
generated during coughing and
sneezing by symptomatic patients but
can also occur from asymptomatic
people and before onset of symptoms
[9]. Studies have shown higher viral
loads in the nasal cavity as compared
to the throat with no difference in viral
burden between symptomatic and
asymptomatic people [12]. Patients can
be infectious for as long as the
symptoms last and even on clinical
recovery. Some people may act as
super spreaders; a UK citizen who
attended a conference in Singapore
infected 11 other people while staying
in a resort in the French Alps and upon
return to the UK [6]. These infected

droplets can spread 1-2 m and deposit

< @
07:24 @ Owe v7 4i

OQ — @ ncbinim.nih.gov/pmc/arti
exponentially in other countries
including South Korea, Italy and Iran.
Of those infected, 20% are in critical
condition, 25% have recovered, and
3310 (3013 in China and 297 in other
countries) have died [2]. India, which
had reported only 3 cases till 2/3/2020,
has also seen a sudden spurt in cases.
By 5/3/2020, 29 cases had been
reported; mostly in Delhi, Jaipur and
Agra in Italian tourists and their
contacts. One case was reported in an
Indian who traveled back from Vienna
and exposed a large number of school
children in a birthday party at a city
hotel. Many of the contacts of these

cases have been quarantined.

These numbers are possibly an
underestimate of the infected and dead
due to limitations of surveillance and
testing. Though the SARS-CoV-2

originated from bats, the intermediary

< @ |
07:24 @ Owe ain |

QQ — @ ncbinimnih.gov/pmc/arti OC) ©
exponentially in other countries
including South Korea, Italy and Iran.
Of those infected, 20% are in critical
condition, 25% have recovered, and
3310 (3013 in China and 297 in other
countries) have died [2]. India, which
had reported only 3 cases till 2/3/2020,
has also seen a sudden spurt in cases.
By 5/3/2020, 29 cases had been
reported; mostly in Delhi, Jaipur and
Agra in Italian tourists and their
contacts. One case was reported in an
Indian who traveled back from Vienna
and exposed a large number of school
children in a birthday party at a city
hotel. Many of the contacts of these

cases have been quarantined.

These numbers are possibly an
underestimate of the infected and dead
due to limitations of surveillance and
testing. Though the SARS-CoV-2

originated from bats, the intermediary
07:24 mM Ore 748

Cases continued to increase
exponentially and modelling studies
reported an epidemic doubling time of
1.8 d [10]. In fact on the 12th of
February, China changed its definition
of confirmed cases to include patients
with negative/ pending molecular tests
but with clinical, radiologic and
epidemiologic features of COVID-19
leading to an increase in cases by
15,000 in a single day [6]. As of
05/03/2020 96,000 cases worldwide
(80,000 in China) and 87 other
countries and 1 international
conveyance (696, in the cruise ship
Diamond Princess parked off the coast
of Japan) have been reported [2]. It is
important to note that while the
number of new cases has reduced in
China lately, they have increased
exponentially in other countries
including South Korea, Italy and Iran.

Of those infected, 20% are in critical

nandAitinn ION hares vanatrarn A ana
07:24 @ Owe ban |
extended to otner clues Ol Hupel

province. Cases of COVID-19 in
countries outside China were reported
in those with no history of travel to
China suggesting that local human-to-
human transmission was occurring in
these countries [9]. Airports in
different countries including India put
in screening mechanisms to detect
symptomatic people returning from
China and placed them in isolation and
testing them for COVID-19. Soon it was
apparent that the infection could be
transmitted from asymptomatic people
and also before onset of symptoms.
Therefore, countries including India
who evacuated their citizens from
Wuhan through special flights or had
travellers returning from China, placed
all people symptomatic or otherwise in
isolation for 14 d and tested them for

the virus.

Cases continued to increase

exponentially and modelling studies
07:23 @ Owe 748
the SARS- CoV. Environmental samples
from the Huanan sea food market also
tested positive, signifying that the virus
originated from there [7]. The number
of cases started increasing
exponentially, some of which did not
have exposure to the live animal
market, suggestive of the fact that
human-to-human transmission was
occurring [8]. The first fatal case was
reported on 11th Jan 2020. The massive
migration of Chinese during the
Chinese New Year fuelled the epidemic.
Cases in other provinces of China,
other countries (Thailand, Japan and
South Korea in quick succession) were
reported in people who were returning
from Wuhan. Transmission to
healthcare workers caring for patients
was described on 20th Jan, 2020. By
23rd January, the 11 million population
of Wuhan was placed under lock down
with restrictions of entry and exit from

the region. Soon this lock down was
07:23 MOre 94
had >95% homology with the bat

coronavirus and > 70% similarity with
the SARS- CoV. Environmental samples
from the Huanan sea food market also
tested positive, signifying that the virus
originated from there [7]. The number
of cases started increasing
exponentially, some of which did not
have exposure to the live animal
market, suggestive of the fact that
human-to-human transmission was
occurring [8]. The first fatal case was
reported on 11th Jan 2020. The massive
migration of Chinese during the
Chinese New Year fuelled the epidemic.
Cases in other provinces of China,
other countries (Thailand, Japan and
South Korea in quick succession) were
reported in people who were returning
from Wuhan. Transmission to
healthcare workers caring for patients
was described on 20th Jan, 2020. By
23rd January, the 11 million population

of Wuhan was placed under lock down
07:23 Owe 7 Ai

Origin and Spread of COVID-19
[1, 2, 6]

In December 2019, adults in Wuhan,
capital city of Hubei province and a
major transportation hub of China
started presenting to local hospitals
with severe pneumonia of unknown
cause. Many of the initial cases had a
common exposure to the Huanan
wholesale seafood market that also
traded live animals. The surveillance
system (put into place after the SARS
outbreak) was activated and
respiratory samples of patients were
sent to reference labs for etiologic
investigations. On December 31st 2019,
China notified the outbreak to the
World Health Organization and on 1st
January the Huanan sea food market
was closed. On 7th January the virus
was identified as a coronavirus that
had >95% homology with the bat

<q @
07:23 MOwe v4
such instance was in 2002-2003 when a

new coronavirus of the B genera and
with origin in bats crossed over to
humans via the intermediary host of
palm civet cats in the Guangdong
province of China. This virus,
designated as severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus affected 8422
people mostly in China and Hong Kong
and caused 916 deaths (mortality rate
11%) before being contained [4].
Almost a decade later in 2012, the
Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV), also of bat
origin, emerged in Saudi Arabia with
dromedary camels as the intermediate
host and affected 2494 people and
caused 858 deaths (fatality rate 34%)
[5].

Origin and Spread of COVID-19
[1, 2, 6]

In December 2019, adults in Wuhan,
capital citv of Hubei province and a

<4 ® i
07:23 Owe 7 Ai
arucle gives a bird’s eye view about

this new virus. Since knowledge about
this virus is rapidly evolving, readers
are urged to update themselves

regularly.

History

Coronaviruses are enveloped positive
sense RNA viruses ranging from 60 nm
to 140 nm in diameter with spike like
projections on its surface giving ita
crown like appearance under the
electron microscope; hence the name
coronavirus [3]. Four corona viruses
namely HKU1, NL63, 229E and OC43
have been in circulation in humans,
and generally cause mild respiratory

disease.

There have been two events in the past
two decades wherein crossover of
animal betacorona viruses to humans
has resulted in severe disease. The first

such instance was in 2002-2003 when a

Pe ee a ER 0 Meee |
07:23 Owe 7 Ai

and Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV), but has lower
fatality. The global impact of this new

epidemic is yet uncertain.

Keywords: 2019-nCOV, SARS-CoV-2,

COVID-19, Pneumonia, Review

Introduction

The 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-
nCoV) or the severe acute respiratory
syndrome corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
as it is now called, is rapidly spreading
from its origin in Wuhan City of Hubei
Province of China to the rest of the
world [1]. Till 05/03/2020 around 96,000
cases of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) and 3300 deaths have been
reported [2]. India has reported 29
cases till date. Fortunately so far,
children have been infrequently
affected with no deaths. But the future
course of this virus is unknown. This
article gives a bird’s eye view about
07:23 Owe 9 Ai

(uouuiy ULE LiUity Guu ULvoe Watt
comorbidities), it may progress to
pneumonia, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) and multi organ
dysfunction. Many people are
asymptomatic. The case fatality rate is
estimated to range from 2 to 3%.
Diagnosis is by demonstration of the
virus in respiratory secretions by
special molecular tests. Common
laboratory findings include normal/
low white cell counts with elevated C-
reactive protein (CRP). The
computerized tomographic chest scan
is usually abnormal even in those with
no symptoms or mild disease.
Treatment is essentially supportive;
role of antiviral agents is yet to be
established. Prevention entails home
isolation of suspected cases and those
with mild illnesses and strict infection
control measures at hospitals that
include contact and droplet

precautions. The virus spreads faster

than its twoa ancestors the SARS-CoV
Abstract

There is a new public health crises
threatening the world with the
emergence and spread of 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) or the severe
acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The virus
originated in bats and was transmitted
to humans through yet unknown
intermediary animals in Wuhan, Hubei
province, China in December 2019.
There have been around 96,000
reported cases of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-2019) and 3300 reported
deaths to date (05/03/2020). The disease
is transmitted by inhalation or contact
with infected droplets and the
incubation period ranges from 2 to 14
d. The symptoms are usually fever,
cough, sore throat, breathlessness,
fatigue, malaise among others. The
disease is mild in most people; in some

(usually the elderly and those with

camarhiditiac) it maw nrnoracce ta
interactions remain largely unclear. Intensive studies on
these virological profiles of SARS-CoV-2 will provide
the basis for the development of preventive and thera-
peutic strategies against COVID-19. Moreover, contin-
ued genomic monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 in new cases is
needed worldwide, as it is important to promptly iden-
tify any mutation that may result in phenotypic changes
of the virus. Finally, COVID-19 is challenging all human
beings. Tackling this epidemic is a long-term job which
requires efforts of every individual, and international
collaborations by scientists, authorities and the public.
this emerging virus will establish a niche in humans
and coexist with us for a long time’. Before clinically
approved vaccines are widely available, there is no bet-
ter way to protect us from SARS-CoV-2 than personal
preventive behaviours such as social distancing and
wearing masks, and public health measures, including
active testing, case tracing and restrictions on social
gatherings. Despite a flood of SARS-CoV-2 research
published every week, current knowledge of this novel
coronavirus is just the tip of the iceberg. The animal
origin and cross-species infection route of SARS-CoV-2
are yet to be uncovered. The molecular mechanisms of
SARS-CoV-2 infection pathogenesis and virus-host
by the University of Oxford. In a randomized controlled
phase I/II trial, it induced neutralizing antibodies against
SARS-CoV-2 in all 1,077 participants after a second
vaccine dose, while its safety profile was acceptable as
well'®. The NIAID and Moderna co-manufactured
mRNA- 1273, a lipid nanoparticle-formulated mRNA
vaccine candidate that encodes the stabilized prefusion
SARS-CoV-2 S protein. Its immunogenicity has been
confirmed by a phase I trial in which robust neutralizing
antibody responses were induced in a dose-dependent
manner and increased after a second dose'™. Regarding
inactivated vaccines, a successful phase I/II trial involv-
ing 320 participants has been reported in China. The
whole-virus COVID-19 vaccine had a low rate of adverse
reactions and effectively induced neutralizing antibody
production’. The verified safety and immunogenicity
support advancement of these vaccine candidates to
phase III clinical trials, which will evaluate their efficacy
in protecting healthy populations from SARS-CoV-2
infection.

Future perspectives

COVID-19 is the third highly pathogenic human coro-
navirus disease to date. Although less deadly than SARS
and MERS, the rapid spreading of this highly conta-
gious disease has posed the severest threat to global
health in this century. The SARS-CoV-2 outbreak has
lasted for more than half a year now, and it is likely that
in vitro and in vivo'*~'**. Compared with convalescent
plasma, which has limited availability and cannot be
amplified, monoclonal antibodies can be developed in
larger quantities to meet clinical requirements. Hence,
they provide the possibility for the treatment and pre-
vention of COVID-19. The neutralizing epitopes of
these monoclonal antibodies also offer important infor-
mation for vaccine design. However, the high cost and
limited capacity of manufacturing, as well as the prob-
lem of bioavailability, may restrict the wide application
of monoclonal antibody therapy.

Vaccines

Vaccination is the most effective method for a long-term
strategy for prevention and control of COVID-19 in
the future. Many different vaccine platforms against
SARS-CoV-2 are in development, the strategies of which
include recombinant vectors, DNA, mRNA in lipid nano-
particles, inactivated viruses, live attenuated viruses and
protein subunits'*-'*'. As of 2 October 2020, ~174 vac-
cine candidates for COVID-19 had been reported
and 51 were in human clinical trials (COVID-19
vaccine and therapeutics tracker). Many of these vac-
cine candidates are in phase II testing, and some have
already advanced to phase III trials. A randomize4
double-blinded phase II trial of an adenovirus type
vectored vaccine expressing the SARS-CoV-2 S protein,
developed by CanSino Biologicals and the Academy of
Military Medical Sciences of China, was conducted in
603 adult volunteers in Wuhan. The vaccine has proved
to be safe and induced considerable humoral and cel-
lular immune response in most recipients after a single
immunization’. Another vectored vaccine, ChAdOx1,
The interferon response is one of the major innate
immunity defences against virus invasion. Interferons
induce the expression of diverse interferon-stimulated
genes, which can interfere with every step of virus
replication. Previous studies identified type I interfer-
ons as a promising therapeutic candidate for SARS’.
In vitro data showed SARS-CoV-2 is even more sen-
sitive to type I interferons than SARS-CoV, suggesting
the potential effectiveness of type I interferons in the
early treatment of COVID-19 (REF.'*’). In China, vapor
inhalation of interferon-a is included in the COVID-19
treatment guideline'”. Clinical trials are ongoing across
the world to evaluate the efficacy of different therapies
involving interferons, either alone or in combination
with other agents”.

Immunoglobulin therapy. Convalescent plasma treat-
ment is another potential adjunctive therapy for
COVID-19. Preliminary findings have suggested
improved clinical status after the treatment’*’*. The
FDA has provided guidance for the use of COVID-19
convalescent plasma under an emergency investigational
new drug application. However, this treatment may have
adverse effects by causing antibody-mediated enhance-
ment of infection, transfusion-associated acute lung
injury and allergic transfusion reactions.

Monoclonal antibody therapy is an effective immuno-
therapy for the treatment of some viral infections in
select patients. Recent studies reported specific mon-
oclonal antibodies neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 infection
other clinical trials in different phases are still ongoing
elsewhere.

Immunomodulatory agents. SARS-CoV-2 triggers a
strong immune response which may cause cytokine
storm syndrome *'. Thus, immunomodulatory agents
that inhibit the excessive inflammatory response may
be a potential adjunctive therapy for COVID-19.
Dexamethasone is a corticosteroid often used in a wide
range of conditions to relieve inflammation through
its anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant effects.
Recently, the RECOVERY trial found dexamethasone
reduced mortality by about one third in hospitalized
patients with COVID-19 who received invasive mechan-
ical ventilation and by one fifth in patients receiving
oxygen. By contrast, no benefit was found in patients
without respiratory support'’’.

Tocilizumab and sarilumab, two types of interleukin-6
(IL-6) receptor-specific antibodies previously used to
reat various types of arthritis, including rheumatoid
arthritis, and cytokine release syndrome, showed effec-
iveness in the treatment of severe COVID-19 by atten-
uating the cytokine storm in a small uncontrolled trial”.
Bevacizumab is an anti-vascular endothelial growth
‘actor (VEGF) medication that could potentially reduce
pulmonary oedema in patients with severe COVID-19.
Eculizumab is a specific monoclonal antibody that

inhibits the proinflammatory complement protein C5.
Preliminary results showed that it induced a drop of
inflammatory markers and C-reactive protein levels,
suggesting its potential to be an option for the treatment
of severe COVID-19 (REF).

and ritonavir had little therapeutic benefit in patients
with COVID-19, but appeared more effective when used
in combination with other drugs, including ribavirin and
interferon beta-1b'**'*. The Randomized Evaluation of
COVID-19 Therapy (RECOVERY) trial, a national clin-
ical trial programme in the UK, has stopped treatment
with lopinavir and ritonavir as no significant beneficial
effect was observed in a randomized trial established in
March 2020 with a total of 1,596 patients'“°. Nevertheless,
respectively’. However, this study did not include
a control arm, and most of the trials of favilavir were
based on a small sample size. For more reliable assess-
ment of the effectiveness of favilavir for treating
COVID-19, large-scale randomized controlled trials
should be conducted.

Lopinavir and ritonavir were reported to have
in vitro inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV™"'’, Alone, the combination of lopinavir
Inhibition of virus replication. Replication inhibitors
include remdesivir (GS-5734), favilavir (T-705), riba-
virin, lopinavir and ritonavir. Except for lopinavir and
ritonavir, which inhibit 3CLpro, the other three all target
RdRp'**"*? (FIG. 5). Remdesivir has shown activity against
SARS-CoV-2 in vitro and in vivo'***. A clinical study
revealed a lower need for oxygen support in patients
with COVID-19 (REF.'°’). Preliminary results of the
Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial (ACTT) clinical
rial by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID) reported that remdesivir can shorten
the recovery time in hospitalized adults with COVID-19
by a couple days compared with placebo, but the differ-
ence in mortality was not statistically significant'*. The
FDA has issued an emergency use authorization for rem-
desivir for the treatment of hospitalized patients with
severe COVID-19. It is also the first approved option by
he European Union for treatment of adults and adoles-
cents with pneumonia requiring supplemental oxygen.
Several international phase III clinical trials are contin-
uing to evaluate the safety and efficacy of remdesivir for
he treatment of COVID-19.

Favilavir (T-705), which is an antiviral drug devel-
oped in Japan to treat influenza, has been approved in
China, Russia and India for the treatment of COVID-19.
A clinical study in China showed that favilavir signif-
icantly reduced the signs of improved disease signs
on chest imaging and shortened the time to viral
clearance’. A preliminary report in Japan showed rates
of clinical improvement of 73.8% and 87.8% from the
start of favilavir therapy in patients with mild COVID-19
at 7 and 14 days, respectively, and 40.1% and 60.3%
in patients with severe COVID-19 at 7 and 14 days,

Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are other
potential but controversial drugs that interfere with
the entry of SARS-CoV-2. They have been used in the
prevention and treatment of malaria and autoimmune
diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus and
rheumatoid arthritis. They can inhibit the glycosyla-
tion of cellular receptors and interfere with virus—host
receptor binding, as well as increase the endosomal pH
and inhibit membrane fusion. Currently, no scientific
consensus has been reached for their efficacy in the
reatment of COVID-19. Some studies showed they can
inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro, but the clinical
data are insufficient'*'”’. Two clinical studies indicated
no association with death rates in patients receiving
chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine compared with
those not receiving the drug and even suggest it may
increase the risk of dying as a higher risk of cardiac arrest
was found in the treated patients'**'*'. On 15 June 2020,
owing to the side effects observed in clinical trials, the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) revoked
the emergency use authorization for chloroquine and
hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19.
Another potential therapeutic strategy is to block bind-
ing of the S protein to ACE2 through soluble recombi-
nant hACE2, specific monoclonal antibodies or fusion
inhibitors that target the SARS-CoV-2 S protein'’-'*

(FIG. 5). The safety and efficacy of these strategies need
to be aeoter in future clinical trials.

Inhibition of virus entry. SARS-CoV-2 uses ACE2 as the
receptor and human proteases as entry activators; sub-
sequently it fuses the viral membrane with the cell mem-
brane and achieves invasion. Thus, drugs that interfere
with entry may be a potential treatment for COVID-19.
Umifenovir (Arbidol) is a drug approved in Russia and
China for the treatment of influenza and other respira-
tory viral infections. It can target the interaction between
the S protein and ACE2 and inhibit membrane fusion
(FIG. 5). In vitro experiments showed that it has activity
against SARS-CoV-2, and current clinical data revealed
it may be more effective than lopinavir and ritonavir in
treating COVID-19 (REFS'>'**). However, other clinical
studies showed umifenovir might not improve the prog-
nosis of or accelerate SARS-CoV-2 clearance in patients
with mild to moderate COVID-19 (REFS!”*!”°). Yet some
ongoing clinical trials are evaluating its efficacy for
COVID-19 treatment. Camostat mesylate is approved
in Japan for the treatment of pancreatitis and postoper-
ative reflux oesophagitis. Previous studies showed that it
can prevent SARS-CoV from entering cells by blocking
TMPRSS2 activity and protect mice from lethal infection
with SARS-CoV in a pathogenic mouse model (wild-
type mice infected with a mouse-adapted SARS-CoV
strain)'°'’, Recently, a study revealed that camostat
mesylate blocks the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into human
lung cells”. Thus, it can be a potential antiviral drug
against SARS-CoV-2 infection, although so far there are
not sufficient clinical data to support its efficacy.
with COVID-19 showed typical features on initial CT,
including bilateral multilobar ground-glass opacities
with a peripheral or posterior distribution''*''’. Thus,
it has been suggested that CT scanning combined
with repeated swab tests should be used for individu-
als with high clinical suspicion of COVID-19 but who
test negative in initial nucleic acid screening". Finally,
SARS-CoV-2 serological tests detecting antibodies to
NorS protein could complement molecular diagnosis,
particularly in late phases after disease onset or for retro-
spective studies''®'*°'?!, However, the extent and dura-
tion of immune responses are still unclear, and available
serological tests differ in their sensitivity and specific-
ity, all of which need to be taken into account when
one is deciding on serological tests and interpreting
their results or potentially in the future test for T cell
responses.

Therapeutics

To date, there are no generally proven effective thera-
pies for COVID-19 or antivirals against SARS-CoV-2,
although some treatments have shown some benefits
in certain subpopulations of patients or for certain end
points (see later). Researchers and manufacturers are
conducting large-scale clinical trials to evaluate var-
ious therapies for COVID-19. As of 2 October 2020,
there were about 405 therapeutic drugs in development
for COVID-19, and nearly 318 in human clinical trials
(COVID-19 vaccine and therapeutics tracker). In the
following sections, we summarize potential therapeutics
against SARS-CoV-2 on the basis of published clinical
data and experience.
viruses in nasal washes, saliva, urine and faeces for up
to 8 days after infection, and a few naive ferrets with only
indirect contact were positive for viral RNA, suggest-
ing airborne transmission”. In addition, transmission
of the virus through the ocular surface and prolonged
presence of SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in faecal samples
were also documented'*'’. Coronaviruses can persist
on inanimate surfaces for days, which could also be the
case for SARS-CoV-2 and could pose a prolonged risk of
infection'’. These findings explain the rapid geographic
spread of COVID-19, and public health interventions to
reduce transmission will provide benefit to mitigate the
epidemic, as has proved successful in China and several
other countries, such as South Korea*?!°4!,

Diagnosis

Early diagnosis is crucial for controlling the spread of
COVID-19. Molecular detection of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid is the gold standard. Many viral nucleic acid detec-
tion kits targeting ORF1b (including RdRp), N, E or
S genes are commercially available'"'°~'. The detection
time ranges from several minutes to hours depending
on the technology'*'”!-'"", The molecular detection
can be affected by many factors. Although SARS-CoV-2
has been detected from a variety of respiratory sources,
including throat swabs, posterior oropharyngeal saliva,
nasopharyngeal swabs, sputum and bronchial fluid,
the viral load is higher in lower respiratory tract sam-
ples'!°°!'""> In addition, viral nucleic acid was also
found in samples from the intestinal tract or blood even
when respiratory samples were negative''’. Lastly, viral
load may already drop from its peak level on disease
onset”. Accordingly, false negatives can be common
when oral swabs and used, and so multiple detection
methods should be adopted to confirm a COVID-19
diagnosis''”''*. Other detection methods were there-
fore used to overcome this problem. Chest CT was
used to quickly identify a patient when the capacity of
molecular detection was overloaded in Wuhan. Patients
areas. For example, a cohort study in London revea’_*
44% of the frontline health-care workers from a hosp
were infected with SARS-CoV-2 (REF.“).

The high transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 may
be attributed to the unique virological features of
SARS-CoV-2. Transmission of SARS-CoV occurred
mainly after illness onset and peaked following dis-
ease severity”. However, the SARS-CoV-2 viral load
in upper respiratory tract samples was already high-
est during the first week of symptoms, and thus the
risk of pharyngeal virus shedding was very high at
the beginning of infection”””. It was postulated that
undocumented infections might account for 79% of
documented cases owing to the high transmissibility
of the virus during mild disease or the asymptomatic
period®. A patient with COVID-19 spreads viruses in
liquid droplets during speech. However, smaller and
much more numerous particles known as aerosol parti-
cles can also be visualized, which could linger in the air
for a long time and then penetrate deep into the lungs
when inhaled by someone else”*-'. Airborne trans-
mission was also observed in the ferret experiments
mentioned above. SARS-CoV-2-infected ferrets shed

of plasma cytokines, which suggests an immunopatho-
logical process caused by a cytokine storm®*”. In this
cohort of patient, around 2.3% people died within
a median time of 16 days from disease onset®**. Men
older than 68 years had a higher risk of respiratory fail-
ure, acute cardiac injury and heart failure that led to
death, regardless of a history of cardiovascular disease*°
(FIG. 4). Most patients recovered enough to be released
from hospital in 2 weeks” (FIG. 4).

Early transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan in
December 2019 was initially linked to the Huanan
Seafood Wholesale Market, and it was suggested as
the source of the outbreak””’’. However, community
transmission might have happened before that**. Later,
ongoing human-to-human transmission propagated the
outbreak’, It is generally accepted that SARS-CoV-2 is
more transmissible than SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV;
however, determination of an accurate reproduction
number (RO) for COVID-19 is not possible yet, as many
asymptomatic infections cannot be accurately accounted
for at this stage. An estimated RO of 2.5 (ranging from
1.8 to 3.6) has been proposed for SARS-CoV-2 recently,
compared with 2.0-3.0 for SARS-CoV”. Notably, most
of the SARS-CoV-2 human-to-human transmission
early in China occurred in family clusters, and in other
countries large outbreaks also happened in other set-
tings, such as migrant worker communities, slaughter-
houses and meat packing plants, indicating the necessity
of isolating infected people”’'*”!-°’. Nosocomial transmis-
sion was not the main source of transmission in China
because of the implementation of infection control
measures in clinical settings’. By contrast, a high risk
of nosocomial transmission was reported in some other

or even die, whereas most young people and children
have only mild diseases (non- pneumonia or mild
pneumonia) or are asymptomatic’, Notably, the risk
of disease was not higher for pregnant women. However,
evidence of transplacental transmission of SARS-CoV-2
rom an infected mother to a neonate was reported,
although it was an isolated case****. On infection, the
most common symptoms are fever, fatigue and dry
cough'***°!, Less common symptoms include sputum
production, headache, haemoptysis, diarrhoea, anorexia,
sore throat, chest pain, chills and nausea and vomiting in
studies of patients in China'*°**', Self-reported olfac-
‘ory and taste disorders were also reported by patients
in Italy. Most people showed signs of diseases after an
incubation period of 1-14 days (most commonly around
5 days), and dyspnoea and pneumonia developed within
a median time of 8 days from illness onset”.

In a report of 72,314 cases in China, 81% of the
cases were classified as mild, 14% were severe cases that
required ventilation in an intensive care unit (ICU) and
a 5% were critical (that is, the patients had respiratory
failure, septic shock and/or multiple organ dysfunction
or failure)”*°. On admission, ground-glass opacity was
the most common radiologic finding on chest computed
tomography (CT)'***°*!, Most patients also developed
marked lymphopenia, similar to what was observed in
patients with SARS and MERS, and non-survivors devel-
oped severer lymphopenia over time'******', Compared
with non-ICU patients, ICU patients had higher levels

lower respiratory tracts. Acute viral interstitial pneu-
monia and humoral and cellular immune responses
were observed**”’. Moreover, prolonged virus shedding
peaked early in the course of infection in asymptomatic
macaques”, and old monkeys showed severer intersti-
tial pneumonia than young monkeys’*, which is similar
to what is seen in patients with COVID-19. In human
ACE2-transgenic mice infected with SARS-CoV-2, typ-
ical interstitial pneumonia was present, and viral anti-
gens were observed mainly in the bronchial epithelial
cells, macrophages and alveolar epithelia. Some human
ACE2-transgenic mice even died after infection”.
In wide-type mice, a SARS-CoV-2 mouse-adapted strain
with the N501Y alteration in the RBD of the S protein
was generated at passage 6. Interstitial pneumonia and
inflammatory responses were found in both young
and aged mice after infection with the mouse-adapted
strain”. Golden hamsters also showed typical symptoms
after being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (REF.”). In other
animal models, including cats and ferrets, SARS-CoV-2
could efficiently replicate in the upper respiratory tract
but did not induce severe clinical symptoms**”. As trans-
mission by direct contact and air was observed in infected
ferrets and hamsters, these animals could be used to
model different transmission modes of COVID-19
(REFS’”-”?), Animal models offer important information
for understanding the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2
infection and the transmission dynamics of SARS-
CoV-2, and are important to evaluate the efficacy of
antiviral therapeutics and vaccines.

Clinical and epidemiological features

It appears that all ages of the population are susceptible to
SARS-CoV-2 infection, and the median age of infection
is around 50 years”'****', However, clinical manifesta-
tions differ with age. In general, older men (>60 years
old) with co-morbidities are more likely to develop
severe respiratory disease that requires hospitalization
The pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection in
humans manifests itself as mild symptoms to severe
respiratory failure. On binding to epithelial cells in
the respiratory tract, SARS-CoV-2 starts replicating
and migrating down to the airways and enters alveo-
lar epithelial cells in the lungs. The rapid replication of
SARS-CoV-2 in the lungs may trigger a strong immune
response. Cytokine storm syndrome causes acute res-
piratory distress syndrome and respiratory failure, which
is considered the main cause of death in patients with
COVID-19 (REFS*”"!). Patients of older age (>60 years)
and with serious pre-existing diseases have a greater risk
of developing acute respiratory distress syndrome and
death" (FIG. 4). Multiple organ failure has also been
reported in some COVID-19 cases**.
Histopathological changes in patients with COVID-19
occur mainly in the lungs. Histopathology analyses
showed bilateral diffused alveolar damage, hyaline
membrane formation, desquamation of pneumocytes
and fibrin deposits in lungs of patients with severe
COVID-19. Exudative inflammation was also shown
in some cases. Immunohistochemistry assays detected
SARS-CoV-2 antigen in the upper airway, bronchiolar
epithelium and submucosal gland epithelium, as well as
in type I and type II pneumocytes, alveolar macrophages
and hyaline membranes in the lungs'*°’,

Animal models used for studying SARS-CoV-2
infection pathogenesis include non-human primates
(rhesus macaques, cynomolgus monkeys, marmosets
and African green monkeys), mice (wild-type mice (with
mouse-adapted virus) and human ACE2-transgenic
or human ACE2-knock-in mice), ferrets and golden
hamsters***-“, In non-human primate animal mod-
els, most species display clinical features similar to those
of patients with COVID-19, including virus shedding,
virus replication and host responses to SARS-CoV-2
infection®”*”*. For example, in the rhesus macaque
model, high viral loads were detected in the upper and

Currently, our knowledge on the animal origin of
SARS-CoV-2 remains incomplete to a large part. The
reservoir hosts of the virus have not been clearly proven.
It is unknown whether SARS-CoV-2 was transmitted
to humans through an intermediate host and which
animals may act as its intermediate host. Detection o
RaTG13, RmYNO02 and pangolin coronaviruses implies
that diverse coronaviruses similar to SARS-CoV-2 are
circulating in wildlife. In addition, as previous stud-
ies showed recombination as the potential origin o
some sarbecoviruses such as SARS-CoV, it cannot be
excluded that viral RNA recombination among differen
related coronaviruses was involved in the evolution o
SARS-CoV-2. Extensive surveillance of SARS-CoV-2-
related viruses in China, Southeast Asia and other
regions targeting bats, wild and captured pangolins and
other wildlife species will help us to better understand
the zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-2.

Besides wildlife, researchers investigated the sus-
ceptibility of domesticated and laboratory animals to
SARS-CoV-2 infection. The study demonstrated exper-
imentally that SARS-CoV-2 replicates efficiently in cats
and in the upper respiratory tract of ferrets, whereas
dogs, pigs, chickens and ducks were not susceptible to
SARS-CoV-2 (REF.")). The susceptibility of minks was
documented by a report from the Netherlands on an
outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infection in farmed minks.
Although the symptoms in most infected minks were
mild, some developed severe respiratory distress
and died of interstitial pneumonia“. Both virologi-
cal and serological testing found evidence for natural
SARS-CoV-2 infection in two dogs from households with
human cases of COVID-19 in Hong Kong, but the dogs

residues for receptor binding” (FIG. 3b). In comparison
with the Guangdong strains, pangolin coronaviruses
reported from Guangxi are less similar to SARS-CoV-2,
with 85.5% genome sequence identity”. The repeated
occurrence of SARS-CoV-2-related coronavirus infec-
tions in pangolins from different smuggling events
suggests that these animals are possible hosts of the
viruses. However, unlike bats, which carry coronaviruses
healthily, the infected pangolins showed clinical signs
and histopathological changes, including interstitial
pneumonia and inflammatory cell infiltration in diverse
organs“. These abnormalities suggest that pangolins are
unlikely to be the reservoir of these coronaviruses but
more likely acquired the viruses after spillover from the
natural hosts.

An intermediate host usually plays an important role
in the outbreak of bat-derived emerging coronaviruses;
for example, palm civets for SARS-CoV and dromedary
camels for MERS-CoV. The virus strains carried by these
two intermediate hosts were almost genetically identi-
cal to the corresponding viruses in humans (more than
99% genome sequence identity)'. Despise an RBD that is
virtually identical to that of SARS-CoV-2, the pangolin
coronaviruses known to date have no more than 92%
genome identity with SARS-CoV-2 (REF). The avail-
able data are insufficient to interpret pangolins as the
intermediate host of SARS-CoV-2. So far, no evidence
has shown that pangolins were directly involved in the
emergence of SARS-CoV-2.
in Yunnan. This novel bat virus, denoted “RmYN02;
is 93.3% identical to SARS-CoV-2 across the genome.
In the long lab gene, it exhibits 97.2% identity to
SARS-CoV-2, which is even higher than for RaTG13
(REF). In addition to RaTG13 and RmYN02, phyloge-
netic analysis shows that bat coronaviruses ZC45 and
ZXC21 previously detected in Rhinolophus pusillus
bats from eastern China also fall into the SARS-CoV-2
lineage of the subgenus Sarbecovirus” (FIG. 2). The dis-
covery of diverse bat coronaviruses closely related to
SARS-CoV-2 suggests that bats are possible reservoirs
of SARS-CoV-2 (REF.*”). Nevertheless, on the basis of
current findings, the divergence between SARS-CoV-2
and related bat coronaviruses likely represents more than
20 years of sequence evolution, suggesting that these bat
coronaviruses can be regarded only as the likely evolu-
tionary precursor of SARS-CoV-2 but not as the direct
progenitor of SARS-CoV-2 (REF.*).

Beyond bats, pangolins are another wildlife host
probably linked with SARS-CoV-2. Multiple SARS-CoV-2-
related viruses have been identified in tissues of Malayan
pangolins smuggled from Southeast Asia into southern
China from 2017 to 2019. These viruses from pangolins
independently seized by Guangxi and Guangdong pro-
vincial customs belong to two distinct sublineages*-*".
The Guangdong strains, which were isolated or
sequenced by different research groups from smug-
gled pangolins, have 99.8% sequence identity with each
other"'. They are very closely related to SARS-CoV-2,
exhibiting 92.4% sequence similarity. Notably, the RBD
of Guangdong pangolin coronaviruses is highly similar
to that of SARS-CoV-2. The receptor-binding motif
(RBM; which is part of the RBD) of these viruses has
only one amino acid variation from SARS-CoV-2, and
it is identical to that of SARS-CoV-2 in all five critical
polymorphism at nucleotide position 28,144, which
results in amino acid substitution of Ser for Lys at residue
84 of the ORF8 protein. Those variants with this muta-
tion make up a single subclade labelled as ‘clade S**™*.
Currently, however, the available sequence data are not
sufficient to interpret the early global transmission his-
tory of the virus, and travel patterns, founder effects and
public health measures also strongly influence the spread
of particular lineages, irrespective of potential biological
differences between different virus variants.

Animal host and spillover

Bats are important natural hosts of alphacoronavi-
ruses and betacoronaviruses. The closest relative
to SARS-CoV-2 known to date is a bat coronavirus
detected in Rhinolophus affinis from Yunnan province,
China, named ‘RaTG13’, whose full-length genome
sequence is 96.2% identical to that of SARS-CoV-2
(REF."'). This bat virus shares more than 90% sequence
identity with SARS-CoV-2 in all ORFs throughout
the genome, including the highly variable S and ORF8
(REF."). Phylogenetic analysis confirms that SARS-CoV-2
closely clusters with RaTG13 (FIG. 2). The high genetic
similarity between SARS-CoV-2 and RaTG13 supports
the hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 likely originated from
bats®. Another related coronavirus has been reported

more recently in a Rhinolophus malayanus bat sampled
in Yunnan Thic navel hat virne denated ‘RmMYNN)’
To assess the genetic variation of different SARS-
CoV-2 strains, the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Resource
of China National Center for Bioinformation aligned
77,801 genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 detected glob-
ally and identified a total of 15,018 mutations, including
14,824 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (BIGD)*'.
In the S protein, four amino acid alterations, V483A,
L455I, F456V and G4765, are located near the binding
interface in the RBD, but their effects on binding to the
host receptor are unknown. The alteration D614G in
the S1 subunit was found far more frequently than other
S variant sites, and it is the marker of a major subclade of
SARS-CoV-2 (clade G). Since March 2020, SARS-CoV-2
variants with G614 in the S protein have replaced the
original D614 variants and become the dominant form
circulating globally. Compared with the D614 variant,
higher viral loads were found in patients infected with
the G614 variant, but clinical data suggested no signif-
icant link between the D614G alteration and disease
severity’’. Pseudotyped viruses carrying the S protein
with G614 generated higher infectious titres than viruses
carrying the S protein with D614, suggesting the altera-
tion may have increased the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2
(REF). However, the results of in vitro experiments based
on pseudovirus models may not exactly reflect natural
infection. This preliminary finding should be validated
by more studies using wild-type SARS-CoV-2 variants to
infect different target cells and animal models. Whether
this amino acid change enhanced virus transmissibil-
ity is also to be determined. Another marker mutation
for SARS-CoV-2 evolution is the single-nucleotide
a polybasic cleavage site (RRAR), which enables effec-
tive cleavage by furin and other proteases”. Such an
S1-S2 cleavage site is not observed in all related viruses
belonging to the subgenus Sarbecovirus, except for a
similar three amino acid insertion (PAA) in RmYN02,
a bat-derived coronavirus newly reported from
Rhinolophus malayanus in China” (FIG. 3a). Although the
insertion in RmYNO02 does not functionally represent a
polybasic cleavage site, it provides support for the notion
that this characteristic, initially considered unique to
SARS-CoV-2, has been acquired naturally”. A structural
study suggested that the furin-cleavage site can reduce
the stability of SARS-CoV-2 S protein and facilitate the
conformational adaption that is required for the binding
of the RBD to its receptor”. Whether the higher trans-
missibility of SARS-CoV-2 compared with SARS-CoV
is a gain of function associated with acquisition of the
furin-like cleavage site is yet to be demonstrated”®.

An additional distinction is the accessory gene orf8
of SARS-CoV-2, which encodes a novel protein showing
only 40% amino acid identity to ORF8 of SARS-CoV.
Unlike in SARS-CoV, this new ORF8 protein does
not contain a motif that triggers intracellular stress
pathways”. Notably, a SARS-CoV-2 variant with a
382-nucleotide deletion covering the whole of ORF8 has
been discovered in a number of patients in Singapore,
which resembles the 29- or 415-nucleotide deletions in
the ORF8 region observed in human SARS-CoV variants
from the late phase of the 2002-2003 outbreak”. Such
ORFS deletion may be indicative of human adaptation

after cross-species transmission from an animal host.
6 h6fluaS SC... KC tC CAN

mM. .. ae: oe

and other SARSr-CoVs (FIG. 2). Using sequences of five
conserved replicative domains in pplab (3C-like protease
(3CLpro), nidovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRp)-associated nucleotidyltransferase (NiRAN),
RdRp, zinc-binding domain (ZBD) and HELI), the
Coronaviridae Study Group of the International
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses estimated the
pairwise patristic distances between SARS-CoV-2 and
known coronaviruses, and assigned SARS-CoV-2 to
the existing species SARSr-CoV”. Although phyloge-
netically related, SARS-CoV-2 is distinct from all other
coronaviruses from bats and pangolins in this species.
The SARS-CoV-2 S protein has a full size of
1,273 amino acids, longer than that of SARS-CoV
(1,255 amino acids) and known bat SARSr-CoVs
(1,245-1,269 amino acids). It is distinct from the S pro-
teins of most members in the subgenus Sarbecovirus,
sharing amino acid sequence similarities of 76.7-
77.0% with SARS-CoVs from civets and humans,
length to the corresponding proteins in SARS-CoV.
Of the four structural genes, SARS-CoV-2 shares more
than 90% amino acid identity with SARS-CoV except
for the S gene, which diverges''”’. The replicase gene
covers two thirds of the 5’ genome, and encodes a large
polyprotein (pp1lab),which is proteolytically cleaved into
16 non-structural proteins that are involved in transcrip-
tion and virus replication. Most of these SARS-CoV-2
non-structural proteins have greater than 85% amino
acid sequence identity with SARS-CoV”.

The phylogenetic analysis for the whole genome
shows that SARS-CoV-2 is clustered with SARS-CoV
and SARS-related coronaviruses (SARSr-CoVs) found
in bats, placing it in the subgenus Sarbecovirus of the
genus Betacoronavirus. Within this clade, SARS-CoV-2
is grouped in a distinct lineage together with four horse-
shoe bat coronavirus isolates (RaTG13, RMYN02, ZC45
and ZXC21) as well as novel coronaviruses recently iden-
tified in pangolins, which group parallel to SARS-CoV

216 countries and regions from all six continents had
reported more than 20 million cases of COVID-19, and
more than 733,000 patients had died’'. High mortality
occurred especially when health-care resources were
overwhelmed. The USA is the country with the larges
number of cases so far.

Although genetic evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2
is a natural virus that likely originated in animals, there is
no conclusion yet about when and where the virus firs!
entered humans. As some of the first reported cases
in Wuhan had no epidemiological link to the seafood
market”, it has been suggested that the market may not be
the initial source of human infection with SARS-CoV-2.
One study from France detected SARS-CoV-2 by PCR
in a stored sample from a patient who had pneumonia
at the end of 2019, suggesting SARS-CoV-2 might have
spread there much earlier than the generally known
starting time of the outbreak in France”*. However, this
individual early report cannot give a solid answer to the
origin of SARS-CoV-2 and contamination, and thus a
false positive result cannot be excluded. To address this
highly controversial issue, further retrospective inves-
tigations involving a larger number of banked samples
from patients, animals and environments need to be
conducted worldwide with well-validated assays.

Genomics, phylogeny and taxonomy

As a novel betacoronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 shares
79% genome sequence identity with SARS-CoV and
50% with MERS-CoV™. Its genome organization is
shared with other betacoronaviruses. The six functional
open reading frames (ORFs) are arranged in order from
5’ to 3’: replicase (ORFla/ORF 1b), spike (S), envelope
(E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N). In addition,
seven putative ORFs encoding accessory proteins are
interspersed between the structural genes”. Most of
the proteins encoded by SARS-CoV-2 have a similar
it had spread massively to all 34 provinces of China. The
number of confirmed cases suddenly increased, with
thousands of new cases diagnosed daily during late
January’. On 30 January, the WHO declared the novel
coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency of inter-
national concern'®. On 11 February, the International
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses named the novel
coronavirus ‘SARS-CoV-2; and the WHO named the
disease ‘COVID-19’ (REF).

The outbreak of COVID-19 in China reached an
epidemic peak in February. According to the National
Health Commission of China, the total number of
cases continued to rise sharply in early February at an
average rate of more than 3,000 newly confirmed cases
per day. To control COVID-19, China implemented
unprecedentedly strict public health measures. The city
of Wuhan was shut down on 23 January, and all travel
and transportation connecting the city was blocked.
n the following couple of weeks, all outdoor activities
and gatherings were restricted, and public facilities were
closed in most cities as well as in countryside'’. Owing to
hese measures, the daily number of new cases in China
started to decrease steadily”.

However, despite the declining trend in China, the
international spread of COVID-19 accelerated from late
February. Large clusters of infection have been reported
from an increasing number of countries!*. The high
ransmission efficiency of SARS-CoV-2 and the abun-
dance of international travel enabled rapid worldwide
spread of COVID-19. On 11 March 2020, the WHO
officially characterized the global COVID-19 out-
break as a pandemic”’. Since March, while COVID-19
in China has become effectively controlled, the case
numbers in Europe, the USA and other regions have
jumped sharply. According to the COVID-19 dash-
board of the Center for System Science and Engineering
at Johns Hopkins University, as of 11 August 2020,

and chest discomfort, and in severe cases dyspnea and
bilateral lung infiltration®’. Among the first 27 docu-
mented hospitalized patients, most cases were epidemi-
ologically linked to Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market
a wet market located in downtown Wuhan, which sells
not only seafood but also live animals, including poultry
and wildlife**. According to a retrospective study, the
onset of the first known case dates back to 8 December
2019 (REF). On 31 December, Wuhan Municipal Health
Commission notified the public of a pneumonia out:
break of unidentified cause and informed the Worl¢
Health Organization (WHO) (FIG. 1).

By metagenomic RNA sequencing and virus isola.
tion from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples from
patients with severe pneumonia, independent teams
of Chinese scientists identified that the causative agent o:
this emerging disease is a betacoronavirus that had never
been seen before®!''. On 9 January 2020, the result of
this etiological identification was publicly announcec¢
(FIG. 1). The first genome sequence of the novel coro-
navirus was published on the Virological website or
10 January, and more nearly complete genome sequences
determined by different research institutes were ther
released via the GISAID database on 12 January’
Later, more patients with no history of exposure tc
Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market were identified
Several familial clusters of infection were reported.
and nosocomial infection also occurred in health-care
acilities. All these cases provided clear evidence fot
human-to-human transmission of the new virus*’-“
As the outbreak coincided with the approach of the
lunar New Year, travel between cities before the festiva.
acilitated virus transmission in China. This novel coro-
navirus pneumonia soon spread to other cities in Hube:
province and to other parts of China. Within 1 month

